5.4 ■ Periodic Noise Reduction by Frequency Domain Filtering

337

FIGURE 5.17

Noise pattern of
the image in
Fig. 5.16(a)
obtained by
bandpass filtering.

■ Performing straight bandpass filtering on an image is not a common procedure because it generally removes too much image detail. However, bandpass
filtering is quite useful in isolating the effects on an image caused by selected
frequency bands. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.17. This image was generated by
(1) using Eq. (5.4-1) to obtain the bandpass filter corresponding to the bandreject filter used in Fig. 5.16; and (2) taking the inverse transform of the
bandpass-filtered transform. Most image detail was lost, but the information
that remains is most useful, as it is clear that the noise pattern recovered using
this method is quite close to the noise that corrupted the image in Fig. 5.16(a).
In other words, bandpass filtering helped isolate the noise pattern. This is a
useful result because it simplifies analysis of the noise, reasonably independently of image content.
■

5.4.3 Notch Filters
A notch filter rejects (or passes) frequencies in predefined neighborhoods
about a center frequency. Equations for notch filtering are detailed in Section
4.10.2. Figure 5.18 shows 3-D plots of ideal, Butterworth, and Gaussian notch
(reject) filters. Due to the symmetry of the Fourier transform, notch filters must
appear in symmetric pairs about the origin in order to obtain meaningful results. The one exception to this rule is if the notch filter is located at the origin,
in which case it appears by itself. Although we show only one pair for illustrative purposes, the number of pairs of notch filters that can be implemented is
arbitrary. The shape of the notch areas also can be arbitrary (e.g., rectangular).
As explained in Section 4.10.2, we can obtain notch filters that pass, rather
than suppress, the frequencies contained in the notch areas. Since these filters
perform exactly the opposite function as the notch reject filters, their transfer
functions are given by
HNP (u, v) = 1 - HNR(u, v)

(5.4-2)

where HNP (u, v) is the transfer function of the notch pass filter corresponding
to the notch reject filter with transfer function HNR(u, v).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 5.7:
Bandpass filtering
for extracting
noise patterns.

338

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

a
b c

H (u, v)

FIGURE 5.18

Perspective plots
of (a) ideal,
(b) Butterworth
(of order 2), and
(c) Gaussian
notch (reject)
filters.

v

u
H (u, v)

u

EXAMPLE 5.8:
Removal of
periodic noise by
notch filtering.

v

H (u, v)

u

v

■ Figure 5.19(a) shows the same image as Fig. 4.51(a). The notch filtering approach that follows reduces the noise in this image, without introducing the
appreciable blurring we saw in Section 4.8.4. Unless blurring is desirable for
reasons we discussed in that section, notch filtering is preferable if a suitable
filter can be found.
Just by looking at the nearly horizontal lines of the noise pattern in Fig. 5.19(a),
we expect its contribution in the frequency domain to be concentrated along the
vertical axis. However, the noise is not dominant enough to have a clear pattern
along this axis, as is evident from the spectrum shown in Fig. 5.19(b). We can get
an idea of what the noise contribution looks like by constructing a simple ideal
notch pass filter along the vertical axis of the Fourier transform, as shown in Fig.
5.19(c). The spatial representation of the noise pattern (inverse transform of the
notch-pass–filtered result) is shown in Fig. 5.19(d).This noise pattern corresponds
closely to the pattern in Fig. 5.19(a). Having thus constructed a suitable notch
pass filter that isolates the noise to a reasonable degree, we can obtain the corresponding notch reject filter from Eq. (5.4-2). The result of processing the image
with the notch reject filter is shown in Fig. 5.19(e). This image contains significantly fewer visible noise scan lines than Fig. 5.19(a).
■
5.4.4 Optimum Notch Filtering
Figure 5.20(a), another example of periodic image degradation, shows a digital
image of the Martian terrain taken by the Mariner 6 spacecraft. The interference pattern is somewhat similar to the one in Fig. 5.16(a), but the former pattern is considerably more subtle and, consequently, harder to detect in the
frequency plane. Figure 5.20(b) shows the Fourier spectrum of the image in

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.4 ■ Periodic Noise Reduction by Frequency Domain Filtering

339

a b
c
e d
FIGURE 5.19

(a) Satellite image
of Florida and the
Gulf of Mexico
showing horizontal
scan lines.
(b) Spectrum.
(c) Notch
pass filter
superimposed on
(b). (d) Spatial
noise pattern.
(e) Result of notch
reject filtering.
(Original image
courtesy of
NOAA.)

question. The starlike components were caused by the interference, and several pairs of components are present, indicating that the pattern contains more
than just one sinusoidal component.
When several interference components are present, the methods discussed
in the preceding sections are not always acceptable because they may remove
too much image information in the filtering process (a highly undesirable feature when images are unique and/or expensive to acquire). In addition, the interference components generally are not single-frequency bursts. Instead,
they tend to have broad skirts that carry information about the interference
pattern. These skirts are not always easily detectable from the normal transform background. Alternative filtering methods that reduce the effect of

www.EBooksWorld.ir

340

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

a b
FIGURE 5.20

(a) Image of the
Martian terrain
taken by Mariner 6.
(b) Fourier
spectrum showing
periodic
interference.
(Courtesy of
NASA.)

these degradations are quite useful in many applications. The method discussed here is optimum, in the sense that it minimizes local variances of the
restored estimate fN(x, y).
The procedure consists of first isolating the principal contributions of the
interference pattern and then subtracting a variable, weighted portion of the
pattern from the corrupted image. Although we develop the procedure in
the context of a specific application, the basic approach is quite general and
can be applied to other restoration tasks in which multiple periodic interference is a problem.
The first step is to extract the principal frequency components of the interference pattern. As before, this can be done by placing a notch pass filter,
HNP (u, v), at the location of each spike. If the filter is constructed to pass only
components associated with the interference pattern, then the Fourier transform of the interference noise pattern is given by the expression
N(u, v) = HNP (u, v)G(u, v)

(5.4-3)

where, as usual, G(u, v), denotes the Fourier transform of the corrupted image.
Formation of HNP (u, v) requires considerable judgment about what is or is
not an interference spike. For this reason, the notch pass filter generally is constructed interactively by observing the spectrum of G(u, v) on a display. After
a particular filter has been selected, the corresponding pattern in the spatial
domain is obtained from the expression
h(x, y) = ᑣ-15HNP (u, v)G(u, v)6

(5.4-4)

Because the corrupted image is assumed to be formed by the addition of the
uncorrupted image f(x, y) and the interference, if h(x, y) were known completely, subtracting the pattern from g(x, y) to obtain f(x, y) would be a simple matter. The problem, of course, is that this filtering procedure usually
yields only an approximation of the true pattern. The effect of components

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.4 ■ Periodic Noise Reduction by Frequency Domain Filtering

not present in the estimate of h(x, y) can be minimized instead by subtracting from g(x, y) a weighted portion of h(x, y) to obtain an estimate of f(x, y):
fN(x, y) = g(x, y) - w(x, y)h(x, y)

(5.4-5)

where, as before, fN(x, y) is the estimate of f(x, y) and w(x, y) is to be determined. The function w(x, y) is called a weighting or modulation function, and
the objective of the procedure is to select this function so that the result is optimized in some meaningful way. One approach is to select w(x, y) so that the
variance of the estimate fN(x, y) is minimized over a specified neighborhood
of every point (x, y).
Consider a neighborhood of size (2a + 1) by (2b + 1) about a point (x, y).
The “local” variance of fN(x, y) at coordinates (x, y) can be estimated from the
samples, as follows:
s2(x, y) =

a
b
2
1
cfN(x + s, y + t) - fN(x, y) d (5.4-6)
a
a
(2a + 1)(2b + 1) s = -a t = -b

where fN (x, y) is the average value of fN in the neighborhood; that is,
fN (x, y) =

a
b
1
fN(x + s, y + t)
a
a
(2a + 1)(2b + 1) s = -a t = -b

(5.4-7)

Points on or near the edge of the image can be treated by considering partial
neighborhoods or by padding the border with 0s.
Substituting Eq. (5.4-5) into Eq. (5.4-6) yields
s2(x, y) =

a
b
1
E 3g(x + s, y + t)
a
a
(2a + 1)(2b + 1) s = -a t = -b

- w(x + s, y + t)h(x + s, y + t)4
- 3g(x, y) - w(x, y)h(x, y)4 F

(5.4-8)

2

Assuming that w(x, y) remains essentially constant over the neighborhood
gives the approximation
w(x + s, y + t) = w(x, y)

(5.4-9)

for -a … s … a and -b … t … b. This assumption also results in the expression
w(x, y)h(x, y) = w(x, y)h(x, y)

(5.4-10)

in the neighborhood. With these approximations, Eq. (5.4-8) becomes
s2(x, y) =

a
b
1
a E 3g(x + s, y + t)
(2a + 1)(2b + 1) sa
= -a t = -b

(5.4-11)

- w(x, y)h(x + s, y + t)4
- 3g(x, y) - w(x, y)h(x, y)4 F

www.EBooksWorld.ir

2

341

342

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

To minimize s2(x, y), we solve
0s2(x, y)
= 0
0w(x, y)

(5.4-12)

for w(x, y). The result is
w(x, y) =

g(x, y)h(x, y) - g(x, y)h(x, y)
h2(x, y) - h2(x, y)

(5.4-13)

To obtain the restored image fN(x, y), we compute w(x, y) from Eq. (5.4-13)
and then use Eq. (5.4-5). As w(x, y) is assumed to be constant in a neighborhood, computing this function for every value of x and y in the image is unnecessary. Instead, w(x, y) is computed for one point in each nonoverlapping
neighborhood (preferably the center point) and then used to process all the
image points contained in that neighborhood.
EXAMPLE 5.9:
Illustration of
optimum notch
filtering.

■ Figures 5.21 through 5.23 show the result of applying the preceding technique
to the image in Fig. 5.20(a). This image is of size 512 * 512 pixels, and a neighborhood with a = b = 15 was selected. Figure 5.21 shows the Fourier spectrum
of the corrupted image. The origin was not shifted to the center of the frequency
plane in this particular case, so u = v = 0 is at the top left corner of the transform image in Fig. 5.21. Figure 5.22(a) shows the spectrum of N(u, v), where only
the noise spikes are present. Figure 5.22(b) shows the interference pattern
h(x, y) obtained by taking the inverse Fourier transform of N(u, v). Note the similarity between this pattern and the structure of the noise present in Fig. 5.20(a).
Finally, Fig. 5.23 shows the processed image obtained by using Eq. (5.4-5).The periodic interference was removed for all practical purposes.
■

FIGURE 5.21

Fourier spectrum
(without shifting)
of the image
shown in Fig.
5.20(a).
(Courtesy of
NASA.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.5 ■ Linear, Position-Invariant Degradations

343

a b
FIGURE 5.22

(a) Fourier
spectrum of
N(u, v), and
(b) corresponding
noise interference
pattern h(x, y).
(Courtesy of
NASA.)

5.5

Linear, Position-Invariant Degradations

The input-output relationship in Fig. 5.1 before the restoration stage is expressed as
g(x, y) = H[f(x, y)] + h(x, y)

(5.5-1)

For the moment, let us assume that h(x, y) = 0 so that g(x, y) = H[ f(x, y)].
Based on the discussion in Section 2.6.2, H is linear if
H[af1(x, y) + bf2(x, y)] = aH[f1(x, y)] + bH[f2(x, y)]

(5.5-2)

where a and b are scalars and f1(x, y) and f2(x, y) are any two input images.
If a = b = 1, Eq. (5.5-2) becomes

Consult the book Web site
for a brief review of linear
system theory.

FIGURE 5.23

Processed image.
(Courtesy of
NASA.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

344

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

H[f1(x, y) + f2(x, y)] = H[f1(x, y)] + H[f2(x, y)]

(5.5-3)

which is called the property of additivity. This property simply says that, if H is
a linear operator, the response to a sum of two inputs is equal to the sum of the
two responses.
With f2(x, y) = 0, Eq. (5.5-2) becomes
H[af1(x, y)] = aH[f1(x, y)]

(5.5-4)

which is called the property of homogeneity. It says that the response to a constant multiple of any input is equal to the response to that input multiplied by
the same constant. Thus a linear operator possesses both the property of additivity and the property of homogeneity.
An operator having the input-output relationship g(x, y) = H[f(x, y)] is
said to be position (or space) invariant if
H[f(x - a, y - b)] = g(x - a, y - b)

See the footnote in page
369 regarding continuous
and discrete variables.

(5.5-5)

for any f(x, y) and any a and b. This definition indicates that the response at
any point in the image depends only on the value of the input at that point, not
on its position.
With a slight (but equivalent) change in notation in the definition of the impulse in Eq. (4.5-3), f(x, y) can be expressed as:
q

f(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)d(x - a, y - b) da db

(5.5-6)

Assume again for a moment that h(x, y) = 0. Then, substitution of Eq. (5.5-6)
into Eq. (5.5-1) results in the expression
q

g(x, y) = H[f(x, y)] = H B

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)d(x - a, y - b) da db R (5.5-7)

If H is a linear operator and we extend the additivity property to integrals, then
q

g(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

H[f(a, b)d(x - a, y - b)] da db

(5.5-8)

Because f(a, b) is independent of x and y, and using the homogeneity property,
it follows that
q

g(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)H[d(x - a, y - b)] da db

(5.5-9)

The term
h(x, a, y, b) = H[d(x - a, y - b)]

(5.5-10)

is called the impulse response of H. In other words, if h(x, y) = 0 in Eq. (5.5-1),
then h(x, a, y, b) is the response of H to an impulse at coordinates (x, y). In
www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.5 ■ Linear, Position-Invariant Degradations

optics, the impulse becomes a point of light and h(x, a, y, b) is commonly referred to as the point spread function (PSF). This name arises from the fact
that all physical optical systems blur (spread) a point of light to some degree,
with the amount of blurring being determined by the quality of the optical
components.
Substituting Eq. (5.5-10) into Eq. (5.5-9) yields the expression
q

g(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)h(x, a, y, b) da db

(5.5-11)

which is called the superposition (or Fredholm) integral of the first kind. This
expression is a fundamental result that is at the core of linear system theory. It
states that if the response of H to an impulse is known, the response to any
input f(a, b) can be calculated by means of Eq. (5.5-11). In other words, a linear system H is completely characterized by its impulse response.
If H is position invariant, then, from Eq. (5.5-5),
H[d(x - a, y - b)] = h(x - a, y - b)

(5.5-12)

Equation (5.5-11) reduces in this case to
q

g(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)h(x - a, y - b) da db

(5.5-13)

This expression is the convolution integral introduced for one variable in
Eq. (4.2-20) and extended to 2-D in Problem 4.11. This integral tells us that
knowing the impulse response of a linear system allows us to compute its
response, g, to any input f. The result is simply the convolution of the impulse response and the input function.
In the presence of additive noise, the expression of the linear degradation
model [Eq. (5.5-11)] becomes
q

g(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)h(x, a, y, b) da db + h(x, y)

(5.5-14)

If H is position invariant, Eq. (5.5-14) becomes
q

g(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

f(a, b)h(x - a, y - b) da db + h(x, y)

(5.5-15)

The values of the noise term h(x, y) are random, and are assumed to be independent of position. Using the familiar notation for convolution, we can write
Eq. (5.5-15) as
g(x, y) = h(x, y)  f(x, y) + h(x, y)

(5.5-16)

or, based on the convolution theorem (see Section 4.6.6), we can express it in
the frequency domain as
G(u, v) = H(u, v)F(u, v) + N(u, v)
www.EBooksWorld.ir

(5.5-17)

345

346

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

These two expressions agree with Eqs. (5.1-1) and (5.1-2). Keep in mind that,
for discrete quantities, all products are term by term. For example, term ij of
H(u, v)F(u, v) is the product of term ij of H(u, v) and term ij of F(u, v).
In summary, the preceding discussion indicates that a linear, spatiallyinvariant degradation system with additive noise can be modeled in the spatial
domain as the convolution of the degradation (point spread) function with an
image, followed by the addition of noise. Based on the convolution theorem,
the same process can be expressed in the frequency domain as the product of
the transforms of the image and degradation, followed by the addition of the
transform of the noise. When working in the frequency domain, we make use
of an FFT algorithm, as discussed in Section 4.11. Keep in mind also the need
for function padding in the implementation of discrete Fourier transforms, as
outlined in Section 4.6.6.
Many types of degradations can be approximated by linear, position-invariant
processes. The advantage of this approach is that the extensive tools of linear
system theory then become available for the solution of image restoration
problems. Nonlinear and position-dependent techniques, although more general (and usually more accurate), introduce difficulties that often have no
known solution or are very difficult to solve computationally. This chapter focuses on linear, space-invariant restoration techniques. Because degradations
are modeled as being the result of convolution, and restoration seeks to find
filters that apply the process in reverse, the term image deconvolution is used
frequently to signify linear image restoration. Similarly, the filters used in the
restoration process often are called deconvolution filters.

5.6

Estimating the Degradation Function

There are three principal ways to estimate the degradation function for use in
image restoration: (1) observation, (2) experimentation, and (3) mathematical
modeling. These methods are discussed in the following sections. The process
of restoring an image by using a degradation function that has been estimated
in some way sometimes is called blind deconvolution, due to the fact that the
true degradation function is seldom known completely.

5.6.1 Estimation by Image Observation
Suppose that we are given a degraded image without any knowledge about the
degradation function H. Based on the assumption that the image was degraded
by a linear, position-invariant process, one way to estimate H is to gather information from the image itself. For example, if the image is blurred, we can
look at a small rectangular section of the image containing sample structures,
like part of an object and the background. In order to reduce the effect of
noise, we would look for an area in which the signal content is strong (e.g., an
area of high contrast). The next step would be to process the subimage to arrive at a result that is as unblurred as possible. For example, we can do this by
sharpening the subimage with a sharpening filter and even by processing small
areas by hand.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.6 ■ Estimating the Degradation Function

Let the observed subimage be denoted by gs (x, y), and let the processed
subimage (which in reality is our estimate of the original image in that area) be
denoted by fNs(x, y). Then, assuming that the effect of noise is negligible because of our choice of a strong-signal area, it follows from Eq. (5.5-17) that
Hs (u, v) =

Gs (u, v)
N (u, v)
F

(5.6-1)

s

From the characteristics of this function, we then deduce the complete degradation function H(u, v) based on our assumption of position invariance. For example, suppose that a radial plot of Hs (u, v) has the approximate shape of a
Gaussian curve.We can use that information to construct a function H(u, v) on
a larger scale, but having the same basic shape. We then use H(u, v) in one of
the restoration approaches to be discussed in the following sections. Clearly,
this is a laborious process used only in very specific circumstances such as, for
example, restoring an old photograph of historical value.

5.6.2 Estimation by Experimentation
If equipment similar to the equipment used to acquire the degraded image is available, it is possible in principle to obtain an accurate estimate of the degradation.
Images similar to the degraded image can be acquired with various system settings
until they are degraded as closely as possible to the image we wish to restore.Then
the idea is to obtain the impulse response of the degradation by imaging an impulse (small dot of light) using the same system settings. As noted in Section 5.5, a
linear, space-invariant system is characterized completely by its impulse response.
An impulse is simulated by a bright dot of light, as bright as possible to reduce the effect of noise to negligible values. Then, recalling that the Fourier
transform of an impulse is a constant, it follows from Eq. (5.5-17) that
H(u, v) =

G(u, v)
A

(5.6-2)

where, as before, G(u, v) is the Fourier transform of the observed image and A is
a constant describing the strength of the impulse. Figure 5.24 shows an example.

5.6.3 Estimation by Modeling
Degradation modeling has been used for many years because of the insight it
affords into the image restoration problem. In some cases, the model can even
take into account environmental conditions that cause degradations. For example,
a degradation model proposed by Hufnagel and Stanley [1964] is based on the
physical characteristics of atmospheric turbulence.This model has a familiar form:
2

2 5>6

H(u, v) = e-k(u + v )

(5.6-3)

where k is a constant that depends on the nature of the turbulence. With the exception of the 5> 6 power on the exponent, this equation has the same form as
the Gaussian lowpass filter discussed in Section 4.8.3. In fact, the Gaussian LPF
is used sometimes to model mild, uniform blurring. Figure 5.25 shows examples

www.EBooksWorld.ir

347

348

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

a b
FIGURE 5.24

Degradation
estimation by
impulse
characterization.
(a) An impulse of
light (shown
magnified).
(b) Imaged
(degraded)
impulse.

a b
c d
FIGURE 5.25

Illustration of the
atmospheric
turbulence model.
(a) Negligible
turbulence.
(b) Severe
turbulence,
k = 0.0025.
(c) Mild
turbulence,
k = 0.001.
(d) Low
turbulence,
k = 0.00025.
(Original image
courtesy of
NASA.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.6 ■ Estimating the Degradation Function

obtained by simulating blurring an image using Eq. (5.6-3) with values
k = 0.0025 (severe turbulence), k = 0.001 (mild turbulence), and k = 0.00025
(low turbulence). All images are of size 480 * 480 pixels.
Another major approach in modeling is to derive a mathematical model
starting from basic principles. We illustrate this procedure by treating in some
detail the case in which an image has been blurred by uniform linear motion
between the image and the sensor during image acquisition. Suppose that an
image f(x, y) undergoes planar motion and that x0(t) and y0(t) are the timevarying components of motion in the x- and y-directions, respectively. The
total exposure at any point of the recording medium (say, film or digital memory) is obtained by integrating the instantaneous exposure over the time interval during which the imaging system shutter is open.
Assuming that shutter opening and closing takes place instantaneously, and
that the optical imaging process is perfect, isolates the effect of image motion.
Then, if T is the duration of the exposure, it follows that
T

g(x, y) =

L0

f [x - x0(t), y - y0(t)] dt

(5.6-4)

where g(x, y) is the blurred image.
From Eq. (4.5-7), the Fourier transform of Eq. (5.6-4) is
q

G(u, v) =

L- q L- q
q

=

q

g(x, y)e-j2p(ux + vy) dx dy
(5.6-5)
T

q

L- q L- q

B

L0

f [x - x0(t), y - y0(t)] dt R e -j2p(ux + vy) dx dy

Reversing the order of integration allows Eq. (5.6-5) to be expressed in the form
T

G(u, v) =

L0

q

B

q

L- q L- q

f [x - x0(t), y - y0(t)]e -j2p(ux + vy) dx dy R dt (5.6-6)

The term inside the outer brackets is the Fourier transform of the displaced
function f [x - x0(t), y - y0(t)]. Using Eq. (4.6-4) then yields the expression
T

G(u, v) =

L0

F(u, v)e-j2p[ux0(t) + vy0(t)] dt
T

= F(u, v)

L0

e-j2p[ux0(t) + vy0(t)] dt

(5.6-7)

where the last step follows from the fact that F(u, v) is independent of t.
By defining
T

H(u, v) =

L0

e-j2p[ux0(t) + vy0(t)] dt

www.EBooksWorld.ir

(5.6-8)

349

350

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

Eq. (5.6-7) can be expressed in the familiar form
G(u, v) = H(u, v)F(u, v)

(5.6-9)

If the motion variables x0(t) and y0(t) are known, the transfer function H(u, v)
can be obtained directly from Eq. (5.6-8). As an illustration, suppose that the
image in question undergoes uniform linear motion in the x-direction only, at
a rate given by x0(t) = at>T. When t = T, the image has been displaced by a
total distance a. With y0(t) = 0, Eq. (5.6-8) yields
T

H(u, v) =

e-j2pux0(t) dt

L0

T

e-j2puat/T dt
L0
T
sin(pua)e-jpua
=
pua

=

As explained at the end
of Table 4.3, we sample
Eg (5.6-11) in u and v to
generate a discrete filter.

EXAMPLE 5.10:
Image blurring
due to motion.

(5.6-10)

Observe that H vanishes at values of u given by u = n>a, where n is an integer.
If we allow the y-component to vary as well, with the motion given by
y0 = bt>T, then the degradation function becomes
H(u, v) =

T
sin[p(ua + vb)]e-jp(ua + vb)
p(ua + vb)

(5.6-11)

■ Figure 5.26(b) is an image blurred by computing the Fourier transform of the
image in Fig. 5.26(a), multiplying the transform by H(u, v) from Eq. (5.6-11),
and taking the inverse transform. The images are of size 688 * 688 pixels, and
the parameters used in Eq. (5.6-11) were a = b = 0.1 and T = 1. As discussed
in Sections 5.8 and 5.9, recovery of the original image from its blurred counterpart presents some interesting challenges, particularly when noise is present in
■
the degraded image.

a b
FIGURE 5.26

(a) Original image.
(b) Result of
blurring using the
function in Eq.
(5.6-11) with
a = b = 0.1 and
T = 1.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.7 ■ Inverse Filtering

5.7

351

Inverse Filtering

The material in this section is our first step in studying restoration of images
degraded by a degradation function H, which is given or obtained by a method
such as those discussed in the previous section. The simplest approach to
restoration is direct inverse filtering, where we compute an estimate, FN (u, v),
of the transform of the original image simply by dividing the transform of the
degraded image, G(u, v), by the degradation function:
G(u, v)
FN (u, v) =
H(u, v)

(5.7-1)

The division is an array operation, as defined in Section 2.6.1 and in connection with Eq. (5.5-17). Substituting the right side of Eq. (5.1-2) for G(u, v) in
Eq. (5.7-1) yields
N(u, v)
FN (u, v) = F(u, v) +
H(u, v)

(5.7-2)

This is an interesting expression. It tells us that even if we know the degradation function we cannot recover the undegraded image [the inverse Fourier
transform of F(u, v)] exactly because N(u, v) is not known. There is more bad
news. If the degradation function has zero or very small values, then the ratio
N(u, v)> H(u, v) could easily dominate the estimate FN (u, v). This, in fact, is frequently the case, as will be demonstrated shortly.
One approach to get around the zero or small-value problem is to limit the
filter frequencies to values near the origin. From the discussion of Eq. (4.6-21)
we know that H(0, 0) is usually the highest value of H(u, v) in the frequency
domain. Thus, by limiting the analysis to frequencies near the origin, we reduce
the probability of encountering zero values. This approach is illustrated in the
following example.

■ The image in Fig. 5.25(b) was inverse filtered with Eq. (5.7-1) using the
exact inverse of the degradation function that generated that image. That is,
the degradation function used was
2

2 5>6

H(u, v) = e -k[(u - M>2) + (v - N>2) ]

with k = 0.0025. The M> 2 and N> 2 constants are offset values; they center the
function so that it will correspond with the centered Fourier transform, as discussed on numerous occasions in the previous chapter. In this case,
M = N = 480. We know that a Gaussian-shape function has no zeros, so that
will not be a concern here. However, in spite of this, the degradation values became so small that the result of full inverse filtering [Fig. 5.27(a)] is useless. The
reasons for this poor result are as discussed in connection with Eq. (5.7-2).
Figures 5.27(b) through (d) show the results of cutting off values of the
ratio G (u, v) > H (u, v) outside a radius of 40, 70, and 85, respectively. The
cut off was implemented by applying to the ratio a Butterworth lowpass
function of order 10. This provided a sharp (but smooth) transition at the

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 5.11:
Inverse filtering.

352

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

a b
c d
FIGURE 5.27

Restoring
Fig. 5.25(b) with
Eq. (5.7-1).
(a) Result of
using the full
filter. (b) Result
with H cut off
outside a radius of
40; (c) outside a
radius of 70; and
(d) outside a
radius of 85.

desired radius. Radii near 70 yielded the best visual results [Fig. 5.27(c)].
Radius values below that tended toward blurred images, as illustrated in
Fig. 5.27(b), which was obtained using a radius of 40. Values above 70 started
to produce degraded images, as illustrated in Fig. 5.27(d), which was obtained using a radius of 85. The image content is almost visible in this image
behind a “curtain” of noise, but the noise definitely dominates the result.
Further increases in radius values produced images that looked more and
more like Fig. 5.27(a).
■
The results in the preceding example are illustrative of the poor performance of direct inverse filtering in general. The basic theme of the three sections that follow is how to improve on direct inverse filtering.

5.8

Minimum Mean Square Error (Wiener) Filtering

The inverse filtering approach discussed in the previous section makes no explicit provision for handling noise. In this section, we discuss an approach that
incorporates both the degradation function and statistical characteristics of
www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.8 ■ Minimum Mean Square Error (Wiener) Filtering

noise into the restoration process.The method is founded on considering images
and noise as random variables, and the objective is to find an estimate fN of the
uncorrupted image f such that the mean square error between them is minimized. This error measure is given by
e2 = E5(f - fN )26

(5.8-1)

where E5 # 6 is the expected value of the argument. It is assumed that the
noise and the image are uncorrelated; that one or the other has zero mean; and
that the intensity levels in the estimate are a linear function of the levels in the
degraded image. Based on these conditions, the minimum of the error function
in Eq. (5.8-1) is given in the frequency domain by the expression
N (u, v) = B
F

= B

= B

H *(u, v)Sf (u, v)
Sf (u, v) ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2 + S h (u, v)

R G(u, v)

H *(u, v)
ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2 + S h (u, v)>Sf (u, v)

R G(u, v)

(5.8-2)

ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2
1
R G(u, v)
2
H(u, v) ƒ H(u, v) ƒ + S h (u, v)>Sf (u, v)

where we used the fact that the product of a complex quantity with its conjugate is equal to the magnitude of the complex quantity squared. This result is
known as the Wiener filter, after N. Wiener [1942], who first proposed the concept in the year shown. The filter, which consists of the terms inside the brackets, also is commonly referred to as the minimum mean square error filter or
the least square error filter. We include references at the end of the chapter to
sources containing detailed derivations of the Wiener filter. Note from the first
line in Eq. (5.8-2) that the Wiener filter does not have the same problem as the
inverse filter with zeros in the degradation function, unless the entire denominator is zero for the same value(s) of u and v.
The terms in Eq. (5.8-2) are as follows:
H(u, v) = degradation function
H *(u, v) = complex conjugate of H(u, v)
ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2 = H *(u, v)H(u, v)
S h (u, v) = ƒ N(u, v) ƒ 2 = power spectrum of the noise [see Eq. (4.6–18)]†
Sf (u, v) = ƒ F(u, v) ƒ 2 = power spectrum of the undegraded image

†

The term ƒ N(u, v) ƒ 2 also is referred to as the autocorrelation of the noise. This terminology comes from
the correlation theorem (first line of entry 7 in Table 4.3). When the two functions are the same, correlation becomes autocorrelation and the right side of that entry becomes N*(u, v)N(u, v), which is equal
to ƒ N(u, v) ƒ 2. Similar comments apply to ƒ F(u, v) ƒ 2, which is the autocorrelation of the image. We discuss correlation in more detail in Chapter 12.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

353

Note that entire images
are being considered random variables, as discussed at the end of
Section 2.6.8.

354

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

As before, H(u, v) is the transform of the degradation function and G(u, v) is
the transform of the degraded image. The restored image in the spatial domain
is given by the inverse Fourier transform of the frequency-domain estimate
N (u, v). Note that if the noise is zero, then the noise power spectrum vanishes
F
and the Wiener filter reduces to the inverse filter.
A number of useful measures are based on the power spectra of noise and
of the undegraded image. One of the most important is the signal-to-noise
ratio, approximated using frequency domain quantities such as
M-1 N-1

a a ƒ F(u, v) ƒ

SNR =

2

u=0 v=0
M-1 N-1

(5.8-3)

2
a a ƒ N(u, v) ƒ

u=0 v=0

This ratio gives a measure of the level of information bearing signal power
(i.e., of the original, undegraded image) to the level of noise power. Images
with low noise tend to have a high SNR and, conversely, the same image with
a higher level of noise has a lower SNR. This ratio by itself is of limited value,
but it is an important metric used in characterizing the performance of
restoration algorithms.
The mean square error given in statistical form in Eq. (5.8-1) can be approximated also in terms a summation involving the original and restored images:
MSE =

1 M-1 N-1
2
N
a [f(x, y) - f(x, y)]
MN xa
=0 y=0

(5.8-4)

In fact, if one considers the restored image to be “signal” and the difference
between this image and the original to be noise, we can define a signal-to-noise
ratio in the spatial domain as
M-1 N-1

2
N
a a f(x, y)

x=0 y=0

SNR = M - 1 N - 1

(5.8-5)

N
a a [f(x, y) - f(x, y)]

2

x=0 y=0

The closer f and fN are, the larger this ratio will be. Sometimes the square root
of these measures is used instead, in which case they are referred to as the
root-mean-square-signal-to-noise ratio and the root-mean-square-error, respectively. As we have mentioned several times before, keep in mind that
quantitative metrics do not necessarily relate well to perceived image quality.
When we are dealing with spectrally white noise, the spectrum ƒ N(u, v) ƒ 2 is
a constant, which simplifies things considerably. However, the power spectrum
of the undegraded image seldom is known. An approach used frequently when
these quantities are not known or cannot be estimated is to approximate
Eq. (5.8-2) by the expression

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.8 ■ Minimum Mean Square Error (Wiener) Filtering

N (u, v) = B
F

ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2
1
R G(u, v)
H(u, v) ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2 + K

355

(5.8-6)

where K is a specified constant that is added to all terms of ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2. The
following examples illustrate the use of this expression.

■ Figure 5.28 illustrates the advantage of Wiener filtering over direct inverse filtering. Figure 5.28(a) is the full inverse-filtered result from Fig. 5.27(a). Similarly,
Fig. 5.28(b) is the radially limited inverse filter result of Fig, 5.27(c). These images are duplicated here for convenience in making comparisons. Figure 5.28(c)
shows the result obtained using Eq. (5.8-6) with the degradation function used in
Example 5.11.The value of K was chosen interactively to yield the best visual results. The advantage of Wiener filtering over the direct inverse approach is evident in this example. By comparing Figs. 5.25(a) and 5.28(c), we see that the
Wiener filter yielded a result very close in appearance to the original image. ■

EXAMPLE 5.12:
Comparison of
inverse and
Wiener filtering.

■ The first row of Fig. 5.29 shows, from left to right, the blurred image of Fig.

EXAMPLE 5.13:
Further
comparisons of
Wiener filtering.

5.26(b) heavily corrupted by additive Gaussian noise of zero mean and variance of 650; the result of direct inverse filtering; and the result of Wiener filtering. The Wiener filter of Eq. (5.8-6) was used, with H(u, v) from Example
5.10, and with K chosen interactively to give the best possible visual result. As
expected, the inverse filter produced an unusable image. Note that the noise in
the inverse filtered image is so strong that its structure is in the direction of the
deblurring filter. The Wiener filter result is by no means perfect, but it does
give us a hint as to image content. With some difficulty, the text is readable.
The second row of Fig. 5.29 shows the same sequence, but with the level of
noise variance reduced by one order of magnitude.This reduction had little effect
on the inverse filter, but the Wiener results are considerably improved. The text

a b c
FIGURE 5.28 Comparison of inverse and Wiener filtering. (a) Result of full inverse filtering of Fig. 5.25(b).

(b) Radially limited inverse filter result. (c) Wiener filter result.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

356

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

a b c
d e f
g h i
FIGURE 5.29 (a) 8-bit image corrupted by motion blur and additive noise. (b) Result of inverse filtering.

(c) Result of Wiener filtering. (d)–(f) Same sequence, but with noise variance one order of magnitude less.
(g)–(i) Same sequence, but noise variance reduced by five orders of magnitude from (a). Note in (h) how
the deblurred image is quite visible through a “curtain” of noise.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.9 ■ Constrained Least Squares Filtering

357

now is much easier to read. In the third row of Fig. 5.29, the noise variance has decreased more than five orders of magnitude from the first row. In fact, image
5.29(g) has no visible noise. The inverse filter result is interesting in this case. The
noise is still quite visible, but the text can be seen through a “curtain” of noise.
This is a good example of the comments made regarding Eq. (5.7-2). In other
words, as is evident in Fig. 5.29(h), the inverse filter was quite capable of essentially eliminating the blur in the image. However, the noise still dominates the result. If we could “look” behind the noise in Figs. 5.29(b) and (e), the characters
also would show little blurring. The Wiener filter result in Fig. 5.29(i) is excellent,
being quite close visually to the original image in Fig. 5.26(a). These types of results are representative of what is possible with Wiener filtering, as long as a reasonable estimate of the degradation function is available.
■

5.9

Constrained Least Squares Filtering

The problem of having to know something about the degradation function H
is common to all methods discussed in this chapter. However, the Wiener filter
presents an additional difficulty: The power spectra of the undegraded image
and noise must be known. We showed in the previous section that it is possible
to achieve excellent results using the approximation given in Eq. (5.8-6). However, a constant estimate of the ratio of the power spectra is not always a suitable solution.
The method discussed in this section requires knowledge of only the mean
and variance of the noise. As discussed in Section 5.2.4, these parameters usually can be calculated from a given degraded image, so this is an important advantage. Another difference is that the Wiener filter is based on minimizing a
statistical criterion and, as such, it is optimal in an average sense. The algorithm presented in this section has the notable feature that it yields an optimal
result for each image to which it is applied. Of course, it is important to keep in
mind that these optimality criteria, while satisfying from a theoretical point of
view, are not related to the dynamics of visual perception. As a result, the
choice of one algorithm over the other will almost always be determined (at
least partially) by the perceived visual quality of the resulting images.
By using the definition of convolution given in Eq. (4.6-23), and as explained in Section 2.6.6, we can express Eq. (5.5-16) in vector-matrix form:
g = Hf + H

(5.9-1)

For example, suppose that g(x, y) is of size M * N. Then we can form the first N
elements of the vector g by using the image elements in first row of g(x, y), the
next N elements from the second row, and so on.The resulting vector will have dimensions MN * 1. These are also the dimensions of f and H, as these vectors are
formed in the same manner. The matrix H then has dimensions MN * MN. Its
elements are given by the elements of the convolution given in Eq. (4.6-23).
It would be reasonable to arrive at the conclusion that the restoration problem can now be reduced to simple matrix manipulations. Unfortunately, this is
not the case. For instance, suppose that we are working with images of medium
size; say M = N = 512. Then the vectors in Eq. (5.9-1) would be of dimension

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Consult the book Web
site for a brief review of
vectors and matrices.

358

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

Consult the Tutorials section in the book Web site
for an entire chapter devoted to the topic of algebraic techniques for image
restoration.

262,144 * 1, and matrix H would be of dimensions 262,144 * 262,144. Manipulating vectors and matrices of such sizes is not a trivial task. The problem
is complicated further by the fact H is highly sensitive to noise (after the experiences we had with the effect of noise in the previous two sections, this should
not be a surprise). However, formulating the restoration problem in matrix
form does facilitate derivation of restoration techniques.
Although we do not fully derive the method of constrained least squares
that we are about to present, this method has its roots in a matrix formulation.
We give references at the end of the chapter to sources where derivations are
covered in detail. Central to the method is the issue of the sensitivity of H to
noise. One way to alleviate the noise sensitivity problem is to base optimality
of restoration on a measure of smoothness, such as the second derivative of an
image (our old friend the Laplacian). To be meaningful, the restoration must
be constrained by the parameters of the problems at hand. Thus, what is desired is to find the minimum of a criterion function, C, defined as
M-1 N-1

C = a a [§2f(x, y)]2

(5.9-2)

x=0 y=0

subject to the constraint
7 g - HfN 7 2 = 7 H 7 2

(5.9-3)

where 7w7 2 ! wTw is the Euclidean vector norm,† and fN is the estimate of the
undegraded image. The Laplacian operator §2 is defined in Eq. (3.6-3).
The frequency domain solution to this optimization problem is given by the
expression
N (u, v) = B
F

H *(u, v)

ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2 + g ƒ P(u, v) ƒ 2

R G(u, v)

(5.9-4)

where g is a parameter that must be adjusted so that the constraint in Eq. (5.9-3)
is satisfied, and P(u, v) is the Fourier transform of the function
0
p(x, y) = C -1
0

-1
4
-1

0
-1 S
0

(5.9-5)

We recognize this function as the Laplacian operator introduced in Section
3.6.2. As noted earlier, it is important to keep in mind that p(x, y), as well as all
other relevant spatial domain functions, must be properly padded with zeros
prior to computing their Fourier transforms for use in Eq. (5.9-4), as discussed
in Section 4.6.6. Note that Eq. (5.9-4) reduces to inverse filtering if g is zero.
n

Recall that, for a vector w with n components, wTw = a w2k , where wk is the kth component of w.

†

k=1

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.9 ■ Constrained Least Squares Filtering

■ Figure 5.30 shows the result of processing Figs. 5.29(a), (d), and (g) with constrained least squares filters, in which the values of g were selected manually
to yield the best visual results. This is the same procedure we used to generate
the Wiener filtered results in Fig. 5.29(c), (f), and (i). By comparing the constrained least squares and Wiener results, it is noted that the former yielded
slightly better results for the high- and medium-noise cases, with both filters
generating essentially equal results for the low-noise case. It is not unexpected
that the constrained least squares filter would outperform the Wiener filter
when selecting the parameters manually for better visual results. The parameter g in Eq. (5.9-4) is a scalar, while the value of K in Eq. (5.8-6) is an approximation to the ratio of two unknown frequency domain functions; this ratio
seldom is constant. Thus, it stands to reason that a result based on manually selecting g would be a more accurate estimate of the undegraded image.
■

359

EXAMPLE 5.14:
Comparison of
Wiener and
constrained least
squares filtering.

As shown in the preceding example, it is possible to adjust the parameter g
interactively until acceptable results are achieved. If we are interested in optimality, however, then the parameter g must be adjusted so that the constraint in
Eq. (5.9-3) is satisfied. A procedure for computing g by iteration is as follows.
Define a “residual” vector r as
r = g - HfN

(5.9-6)

N (u, v) (and by implication fN ) is a function
Since, from the solution in Eq. (5.9-4), F
of g, then r also is a function of this parameter. It can be shown (Hunt [1973]) that
f(g) = rTr

= 7r7 2

(5.9-7)

a b c
FIGURE 5.30 Results of constrained least squares filtering. Compare (a), (b), and (c) with the Wiener filtering

results in Figs. 5.29(c), (f), and (i), respectively.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

360

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

is a monotonically increasing function of g. What we want to do is adjust g so
that
7r7 2 = 7H7 2 ; a

(5.9-8)

where a is an accuracy factor. In view of Eq. (5.9-6), if 7r7 2 = 7H7 2, the constraint in Eq. (5.9-3) will be strictly satisfied.
Because f(g) is monotonic, finding the desired value of g is not difficult.
One approach is to
1. Specify an initial value of g.
2. Compute 7r7 2.
3. Stop if Eq. (5.9-8) is satisfied; otherwise return to step 2 after increasing g
if 7r7 2 6 7H7 2 - a or decreasing g if 7r7 2 7 7H7 2 + a. Use the new value
N (u, v).
of g in Eq. (5.9-4) to recompute the optimum estimate F
Other procedures, such as a Newton–Raphson algorithm, can be used to improve the speed of convergence.
In order to use this algorithm, we need the quantities 7r7 2 and 7H7 2. To compute 7r7 2, we note from Eq. (5.9-6) that
N (u, v)
R(u, v) = G(u, v) - H(u, v)F

(5.9-9)

from which we obtain r(x, y) by computing the inverse transform of R(u, v).Then
M-1 N-1

7r7 2 = a a r2(x, y)

(5.9-10)

x=0 y=0

Computation of 7H7 2 leads to an interesting result. First, consider the variance
of the noise over the entire image, which we estimate by the sample-average
method, as discussed in Section 3.3.4:
s2h =

1 M-1 N-1
2
a [h(x, y) - mh]
MN xa
=0 y=0

(5.9-11)

1 M-1 N-1
a h(x, y)
MN xa
=0 y=0

(5.9-12)

where
mh =

is the sample mean. With reference to the form of Eq. (5.9-10), we note that
the double summation in Eq. (5.9-11) is equal to 7H7 2. This gives us the
expression
7H7 2 = MN [s2h + m2h]

(5.9-13)

This is a most useful result. It tells us that we can implement an optimum
restoration algorithm by having knowledge of only the mean and variance of
the noise. These quantities are not difficult to estimate (Section 5.2.4), assuming that the noise and image intensity values are not correlated. This is a basic
assumption of all the methods discussed in this chapter.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.10 ■ Geometric Mean Filter

361

a b
FIGURE 5.31

(a) Iteratively
determined
constrained least
squares
restoration of
Fig. 5.16(b), using
correct noise
parameters.
(b) Result
obtained with
wrong noise
parameters.

■ Figure 5.31(a) shows the result obtained by using the algorithm just described to estimate the optimum filter for restoring Fig. 5.25(b). The initial
value used for g was 10-5, the correction factor for adjusting g was 10-6, and
the value for a was 0.25. The noise parameters specified were the same used to
generate Fig. 5.25(a): a noise variance of 10-5, and zero mean. The restored result is almost as good as Fig. 5.28(c), which was obtained by Wiener filtering
with K manually specified for best visual results. Figure 5.31(b) shows what
can happen if the wrong estimate of noise parameters are used. In this case,
the noise variance specified was 10-2 and the mean was left at a value of 0. The
result in this case is considerably more blurred.
■
As stated at the beginning of this section, it is important to keep in mind that
optimum restoration in the sense of constrained least squares does not necessarily imply “best” in the visual sense. Depending on the nature and magnitude of
the degradation and noise, the other parameters in the algorithm for iteratively
determining the optimum estimate also play a role in the final result. In general,
automatically determined restoration filters yield inferior results to manual adjustment of filter parameters. This is particularly true of the constrained least
squares filter, which is completely specified by a single, scalar parameter.

5.10 Geometric Mean Filter
It is possible to generalize slightly the Wiener filter discussed in Section 5.8.
The generalization is in the form of the so-called geometric mean filter:
N (u, v) = c
F

*

d C
2

H (u, v)
ƒ H(u, v) ƒ

a

H *(u, v)

1-a

S h (u, v) S
ƒ H(u, v) ƒ + b B
R
Sf (u, v)
2

G(u, v)

(5.10-1)

with a and b being positive, real constants. The geometric mean filter consists of
the two expressions in brackets raised to the powers a and 1 - a, respectively.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 5.15:
Iterative
estimation of the
optimum
constrained least
squares filter.

362

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

When a = 1 this filter reduces to the inverse filter. With a = 0 the filter becomes the so-called parametric Wiener filter, which reduces to the standard
Wiener filter when b = 1. If a = 1>2, the filter becomes a product of the two
quantities raised to the same power, which is the definition of the geometric
mean, thus giving the filter its name.With b = 1, as a decreases below 1> 2, the filter performance will tend more toward the inverse filter. Similarly, when a increases above 1> 2, the filter will behave more like the Wiener filter.When a = 1>2
and b = 1, the filter also is commonly referred to as the spectrum equalization filter. Equation (5.10-1) is quite useful when implementing restoration filters because it represents a family of filters combined into a single expression.

5.11 Image Reconstruction from Projections

As noted in Chapter 1,
the term computerized
axial tomography (CAT)
is used interchangeably
to denote CT.

In the previous sections of this chapter, we dealt with techniques for restoring
a degraded version of an image. In this section, we examine the problem of
reconstructing an image from a series of projections, with a focus on X-ray
computed tomography (CT). This is the earliest and still the most widely used
type of CT and is currently one of the principal applications of digital image
processing in medicine.

5.11.1 Introduction
The reconstruction problem is simple in principle and can be explained qualitatively in a straightforward, intuitive manner. To begin, consider Fig. 5.32(a),
which consists of a single object on a uniform background. To bring physical
Absorption profile

a b
c d e
FIGURE 5.32

(a) Flat region
showing a simple
object, an input
parallel beam, and
a detector strip.
(b) Result of backprojecting the
sensed strip data
(i.e., the 1-D absorption profile). (c) The
beam and detectors
rotated by 90°.
(d) Back-projection.
(e) The sum of (b)
and (d). The intensity where the backprojections intersect
is twice the intensity
of the individual
back-projections.

Beam

Ray

Detector strip

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

meaning to the following explanation, suppose that this image is a cross section of a 3-D region of a human body. Assume also that the background in the
image represents soft, uniform tissue, while the round object is a tumor, also
uniform, but with higher absorption characteristics.
Suppose next that we pass a thin, flat beam of X-rays from left to right
(though the plane of the image), as Fig. 5.32(a) shows, and assume that the energy of the beam is absorbed more by the object than by the background, as
typically is the case. Using a strip of X-ray absorption detectors on the other
side of the region will yield the signal (absorption profile) shown, whose amplitude (intensity) is proportional to absorption.† We may view any point in
the signal as the sum of the absorption values across the single ray in the beam
corresponding spatially to that point (such a sum often is referred to as a
raysum). At this juncture, all the information we have about the object is this
1-D absorption signal.
We have no way of determining from a single projection whether we are
dealing with a single object or a multitude of objects along the path of the
beam, but we begin the reconstruction by creating an image based on just this
information. The approach is to project the 1-D signal back across the direction from which the beam came, as Fig. 5.32(b) shows. The process of backprojecting a 1-D signal across a 2-D area sometimes is referred to as smearing
the projection back across the area. In terms of digital images, this means duplicating the same 1-D signal across the image perpendicularly to the direction
of the beam. For example, Fig. 5.32(b) was created by duplicating the 1-D signal in all columns of the reconstructed image. For obvious reasons, the approach just described is called backprojection.
Next, suppose that we rotate the position of the source-detector pair by
90°, as in Fig. 5.32(c). Repeating the procedure explained in the previous
paragraph yields a backprojection image in the vertical direction, as Fig.
5.32(d) shows. We continue the reconstruction by adding this result to the
previous backprojection, resulting in Fig. 5.32(e). Now, we can tell that the
object of interest is contained in the square shown, whose amplitude is twice
the amplitude of the individual backprojections. A little thought will reveal
that we should be able to learn more about the shape of the object in question by taking more views in the manner just described. In fact, this is exactly
what happens, as Fig. 5.33 shows. As the number of projections increases, the
strength of non-intersecting backprojections decreases relative to the
strength of regions in which multiple backprojections intersect. The net effect is that brighter regions will dominate the result, and backprojections
with few or no intersections will fade into the background as the image is
scaled for display.
Figure 5.33(f), formed from 32 projections, illustrates this concept. Note,
however, that while this reconstructed image is a reasonably good approximation to the shape of the original object, the image is blurred by a “halo” effect,
†

A treatment of the physics of X-ray sources and detectors is beyond the scope of our discussion, which
focuses on the image processing aspects of CT. See Prince and Links [2006] for an excellent introduction
to the physics of X-ray image formation.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

363

364

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

a b c
d e f
FIGURE 5.33

(a) Same as Fig.
5.32(a).
(b)–(e) Reconstruction using 1, 2, 3,
and 4 backprojections 45° apart.
(f) Reconstruction
with 32 backprojections 5.625° apart
(note the blurring).

the formation of which can be seen in progressive stages in Fig. 5.33. For example, the halo in Fig. 5.33(e) appears as a “star” whose intensity is lower than that
of the object, but higher than the background. As the number of views increases, the shape of the halo becomes circular, as in Fig. 5.33(f). Blurring in CT reconstruction is an important issue, whose solution is addressed in Section
5.11.5. Finally, we conclude from the discussion of Figs. 5.32 and 5.33 that projections 180° apart are mirror images of each other, so we only have to consider
angle increments halfway around a circle in order to generate all the projections required for reconstruction.

EXAMPLE 5.16:
Backprojection of
a simple planar
region containing
two objects.

■ Figure 5.34 illustrates reconstruction using backprojections on a slightly
more complicated region that contains two objects with different absorption
properties. Figure 5.34(b) shows the result of using one backprojection. We
note three principal features in this figure, from bottom to top: a thin horizontal gray band corresponding to the unconcluded portion of the small object, a brighter (more absorption) band above it corresponding to the area
shared by both objects, and an upper band corresponding to the rest of the elliptical object. Figures 5.34(c) and (d) show reconstruction using two projections 90° apart and four projections 45° apart, respectively. The explanation of
these figures is similar to the discussion of Figs. 5.33(c) through (e). Figures
5.34(e) and (f) show more accurate reconstructions using 32 and 64 backprojections, respectively. These two results are quite close visually, and they both
show the blurring problem mentioned earlier, whose solution we address in
■
Section 5.11.5.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

a b c
d e f
FIGURE 5.34 (a) A region with two objects. (b)–(d) Reconstruction using 1, 2, and 4

backprojections 45° apart. (e) Reconstruction with 32 backprojections 5.625° apart.
(f) Reconstruction with 64 backprojections 2.8125° apart.

5.11.2 Principles of Computed Tomography (CT)
The goal of X-ray computed tomography is to obtain a 3-D representation of the
internal structure of an object by X-raying the object from many different directions. Imagine a traditional chest X-ray, obtained by placing the subject against an
X-ray sensitive plate and “illuminating” the individual with an X-ray beam in the
form of a cone. The X-ray plate produces an image whose intensity at a point is
proportional to the X-ray energy impinging on that point after it has passed
through the subject. This image is the 2-D equivalent of the projections we discussed in the previous section.We could back-project this entire image and create
a 3-D volume. Repeating this process through many angles and adding the backprojections would result in 3-D rendition of the structure of the chest cavity.
Computed tomography attempts to get that same information (or localized parts
of it) by generating slices through the body.A 3-D representation then can be obtained by stacking the slices.A CT implementation is much more economical, because the number of detectors required to obtain a high resolution slice is much
smaller than the number of detectors needed to generate a complete 2-D projection of the same resolution. Computational burden and X-ray dosages are similarly reduced, making the 1-D projection CT a more practical approach.
As with the Fourier transform discussed in the last chapter, the basic mathematical concepts required for CT were in place years before the availability of

www.EBooksWorld.ir

365

366

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

digital computers made them practical. The theoretical foundation of CT dates
back to Johann Radon, a mathematician from Vienna who derived a method in
1917 for projecting a 2-D object along parallel rays as part of his work on line integrals.The method now is referred to commonly as the Radon transform, a topic
we discuss in the following section. Forty-five years later, Allan M. Cormack, a
physicist at Tufts University, partially “rediscovered” these concepts and applied
them to CT. Cormack published his initial findings in 1963 and 1964 and showed
how they could be used to reconstruct cross-sectional images of the body from
X-ray images taken at different angular directions. He gave the mathematical
formulae needed for the reconstruction and built a CT prototype to show the
practicality of his ideas. Working independently, electrical engineer Godfrey N.
Hounsfield and his colleagues at EMI in London formulated a similar solution
and built the first medical CT machine. Cormack and Hounsfield shared the 1979
Nobel Prize in Medicine for their contributions to medical tomography.
First-generation (G1) CT scanners employ a “pencil” X-ray beam and a single
detector, as Fig. 5.35(a) shows. For a given angle of rotation, the source/detector
a b
c d

Source

FIGURE 5.35 Four

generations of CT
scanners. The
dotted arrow
lines indicate
incremental
linear motion.
The dotted arrow
arcs indicate
incremental
rotation. The
cross-mark on
the subject’s head
indicates linear
motion
perpendicular to
the plane of the
paper. The
double arrows in
(a) and (b)
indicate that the
source/detector
unit is translated
and then brought
back into its
original position.

Subject

Detector

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

pair is translated incrementally along the linear direction shown. A projection
(like the ones in Fig. 5.32), is generated by measuring the output of the detector
at each increment of translation. After a complete linear translation, the
source/detector assembly is rotated and the procedure is repeated to generate
another projection at a different angle. The procedure is repeated for all desired
angles in the range [0°, 180°] to generate a complete set of projections, from
which one image is generated by backprojection, as explained in the previous
section. The cross-mark on the head of the subject indicates motion in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the source/detector pair. A set of cross sectional images (slices) is generated by incrementally moving the subject (after
each complete scan) past the source/detector plane. Stacking these images computationally produces a 3-D volume of a section of the body. G1 scanners are no
longer manufactured for medical imaging but, because they produce a parallelray beam (as in Fig. 5.32), their geometry is the one used predominantly for introducing the fundamentals of CT imaging. As discussed in the following
section, this geometry is the starting point for deriving the equations necessary
to implement image reconstruction from projections.
Second-generation (G2) CT scanners [Fig. 5.35(b)] operate on the same
principle as G1 scanners, but the beam used is in the shape of a fan. This allows
the use of multiple detectors, thus requiring fewer translations of the
source/detector pair. Third-generation (G3) scanners are a significant improvement over the earlier two generations of CT geometries. As Fig. 5.35(c)
shows, G3 scanners employ a bank of detectors long enough (on the order of
1000 individual detectors) to cover the entire field of view of a wider beam.
Consequently, each increment of angle produces an entire projection, eliminating the need to translate the source/detector pair, as in the geometry of G1
and G2 scanners. Fourth-generation (G4) scanners go a step further. By employing a circular ring of detectors (on the order of 5000 individual detectors),
only the source has to rotate. The key advantage of G3 and G4 scanners is
speed. Key disadvantages are cost and greater X-ray scatter, which requires
higher doses than G1 and G2 scanners to achieve comparable signal-to-noise
characteristics.
Newer scanning modalities are beginning to be adopted. For example, fifthgeneration (G5) CT scanners, also known as electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) scanners, eliminate all mechanical motion by employing electron
beams controlled electromagnetically. By striking tungsten anodes that encircle the patient, these beams generate X-rays that are then shaped into a fan
beam that passes through the patient and excites a ring of detectors, as in G4
scanners.
The conventional manner in which CT images are obtained is to keep the patient stationary during the scanning time required to generate one image. Scanning is then halted while the position of the patient is incremented in the
direction perpendicular to the imaging plane using a motorized table. The next
image is then obtained and the procedure is repeated for the number of increments required to cover a specified section of the body. Although an image may
be obtained in less than one second, there are procedures (e.g., abdominal and

www.EBooksWorld.ir

367

368

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

chest scans) that require the patient to hold his/her breath during image acquisition. Completing these procedures for, say, 30 images, may require several minutes.An approach whose use is increasing is helical CT, sometimes referred to as
sixth-generation (G6) CT. In this approach, a G3 or G4 scanner is configured
using so-called slip rings that eliminate the need for electrical and signal cabling
between the source/detectors and the processing unit. The source/detector pair
then rotates continuously through 360° while the patient is moved at a constant
speed along the axis perpendicular to the scan. The result is a continuous helical
volume of data that is then processed to obtain individual slice images.
Seventh-generation (G7) scanners (also called multislice CT scanners) are
emerging in which “thick” fan beams are used in conjunction with parallel
banks of detectors to collect volumetric CT data simultaneously. That is, 3-D
cross-sectional “slabs,” rather than single cross-sectional images are generated
per X-ray burst. In addition to a significant increase in detail, this approach has
the advantage that it utilizes X-ray tubes more economically, thus reducing
cost and potentially reducing dosage.
Beginning in the next section, we develop the mathematical tools necessary
for formulating image projection and reconstruction algorithms. Our focus is on
the image-processing fundamentals that underpin all the CT approaches just
discussed. Information regarding the mechanical and source/detector characteristics of CT systems is provided in the references cited at the end of the chapter.

5.11.3 Projections and the Radon Transform
Throughout this section,
we follow CT convention
and place the origin of
the xy-plane in the center, instead of at our customary top left corner
(see Section 2.4.2). Note,
however, that both are
right-handed coordinate
systems, the only difference being that our
image coordinate system
has no negative axes. We
can account for the difference with a simple
translation of the origin,
so both representations
are interchangeable.

In what follows, we develop in detail the mathematics needed for image reconstruction in the context of X-ray computed tomography, but the same basic
principles are applicable in other CT imaging modalities, such as SPECT (single photon emission tomography), PET (positron emission tomography), MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging), and some modalities of ultrasound imaging.
A straight line in Cartesian coordinates can be described either by its slopeintercept form, y = ax + b, or, as in Fig. 5.36, by its normal representation:
x cos u + y sin u = r

(5.11-1)

y

r
u

FIGURE 5.36 Normal representation of a straight line.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

x

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections
FIGURE 5.37

y

r

y
Complete projection, g (r, uk),
for a fixed angle

Geometry of a
parallel-ray beam.

A point g (r j , uk) in
the projection
x
uk
x
L (r j , uk)

rj

The projection of a parallel-ray beam may be modeled by a set of such lines, as
Fig. 5.37 shows. An arbitrary point in the projection signal is given by the raysum along the line x cos uk + y sin uk = rj. Working with continuous quantities† for the moment, the raysum is a line integral, given by
q

g(rj, uk) =

q

L- q L- q

f(x, y)d(x cos uk + y sin uk - rj) dx dy

(5.11-2)

where we used the properties of the impulse, d, discussed in Section 4.5.1. In other
words, the right side of Eq. (5.11-2) is zero unless the argument of d is zero, indicating that the integral is computed only along the line x cos uk + y sin uk = rj.
If we consider all values of r and u, the preceding equation generalizes to
q

g(r, u) =

q

L- q L- q

f(x, y)d(x cos u + y sin u - r) dx dy

(5.11-3)

This equation, which gives the projection (line integral) of f(x, y) along an arbitrary
line in the xy-plane, is the Radon transform mentioned in the previous section. The
notation ᑬ5f(x, y)6 or ᑬ5f6 is used sometimes in place of g(r, u) in Eq. (5.11-3)
to denote the Radon transform of f, but the type of notation used in Eq. (5.11-3) is
more customary. As will become evident in the discussion that follows, the Radon
transform is the cornerstone of reconstruction from projections, with computed tomography being its principal application in the field of image processing.
†

369

In Chapter 4, we exercised great care in denoting continuous image coordinates by (t, z) and discrete coordinates by (x, y). At that time, the distinction was important because we were developing basic concepts to take us from continuous to sampled quantities. In the present discussion, we go back and forth
so many times between continuous and discrete coordinates that adhering to this convention is likely to
generate unnecessary confusion. For this reason, and also to follow the published literature in this field
(e.g., see Prince and Links [2006]), we let the context determine whether coordinates (x, y) are continuous or discrete. When they are continuous, you will see integrals; otherwise you will see summations.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

370

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

In the discrete case, Eq. (5.11-3) becomes
M-1 N-1

g(r, u) = a a f(x, y)d(x cos u + y sin u - r)

(5.11-4)

x=0 y=0

where x, y, r, and u are now discrete variables. If we fix u and allow r to vary,
we see that (5.11-4) simply sums the pixels of f(x, y) along the line defined by
the specified values of these two parameters. Incrementing through all values
of r required to span the image (with u fixed) yields one projection. Changing
u and repeating the foregoing procedure yields another projection, and so
forth. This is precisely how the projections in Section 5.11.1 were generated.

EXAMPLE 5.17:
Using the Radon
transform to
obtain the
projection of a
circular region.

■ Before proceeding, we illustrate how to use the Radon transform to obtain
an analytical expression for the projection of the circular object in Fig. 5.38(a):
f(x, y) = b

A
0

x2 + y2 … r2
otherwise

where A is a constant and r is the radius of the object. We assume that the circle is centered on the origin of the xy-plane. Because the object is circularly
symmetric, its projections are the same for all angles, so all we have to do is obtain the projection for u = 0°. Equation (5.11-3) then becomes
q

g(r, u) =

q

L- q L- q

f(x, y)d(x - r) dx dy

q

=

L- q

f(r, y) dy

a
b
FIGURE 5.38 (a) A

disk and (b) a plot of
its Radon transform,
derived analytically.
Here we were able to
plot the transform
because it depends
only on one variable.
When g depends on
both r and u, the
Radon transform
becomes an image
whose axes are r and
u, and the intensity
of a pixel is
proportional to the
value of g at the
location of that pixel.

y

x

g (r)

r
0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

r

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

371

where the second line follows from Eq. (4.2-10). As noted earlier, this is a line
integral (along the line L(r, 0) in this case). Also, note that g(r, u) = 0 when
ƒ r ƒ 7 r. When ƒ r ƒ … r the integral is evaluated from y = - 2r2 - r2 to
y = 2r2 - r2. Therefore,
2r2 - r2

g(r, u) =

L-2r2 - r2

f(r, y)dy

2r2 - r2

=

L-2r2 - r2

Ady

Carrying out the integration yields
g(r, u) = g(r) = b

2A2r2 - r2
0

ƒrƒ … r
otherwise

where we used the fact mentioned above that g(r, u) = 0 when ƒ r ƒ 7 r.
Figure 5.38(b) shows the result, which agrees with the projections illustrated in
Figs. 5.32 and 5.33. Note that g(r, u) = g(r); that is, g is independent of u because the object is symmetric about the origin.
■
When the Radon transform, g(r, u), is displayed as an image with r and u as
rectilinear coordinates, the result is called a sinogram, similar in concept to displaying the Fourier spectrum (unlike the Fourier transform, however, g(r, u) is
always a real function). Like the Fourier transform, a sinogram contains the
data necessary to reconstruct f(x,y). As is the case with displays of the Fourier spectrum, sinograms can be readily interpreted for simple regions, but become increasingly difficult to “read” as the region being projected becomes
more complex. For example, Fig. 5.39(b) is the sinogram of the rectangle on
the left. The vertical and horizontal axes correspond to u and r, respectively.
Thus, the bottom row is the projection of the rectangle in the horizontal direction (i.e., u = 0°), and the middle row is the projection in the vertical direction
(u = 90°). The fact that the nonzero portion of the bottom row is smaller than
the nonzero portion of the middle row tells us that the object is narrower in
the horizontal direction. The fact that the sinogram is symmetric in both directions about the center of the image tells us that we are dealing with an object
that is symmetric and parallel to the x and y axes. Finally, the sinogram is
smooth, indicating that the object has a uniform intensity. Other than these
types of general observations, we cannot say much more about this sinogram.
Figure 5.39(c) shows an image of the Shepp-Logan phantom, a widely used
synthetic image designed to simulate the absorption of major areas of the
brain, including small tumors. The sinogram of this image is considerably more
difficult to interpret, as Fig. 5.39(d) shows. We still can infer some symmetry
properties, but that is about all we can say.Visual analysis of sinograms is of limited practical use, but sometimes it is helpful in algorithm development.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

To generate arrays with
rows of the same size, the
minimum dimension of
the r-axis in sinograms
corresponds to the
largest dimension encountered during projection. For example, the
minimum size of a sinogram of a square of size
M * M obtained using
increments of 1° is
180 * Q, where Q is the
smallest integer greater
than 22M.

372

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction
180

135

u 90

45

0
180

r

135

u 90

45

0

r

a b
c d
FIGURE 5.39 Two images and their sinograms (Radon transforms). Each row of a sinogram

is a projection along the corresponding angle on the vertical axis. Image (c) is called the
Shepp-Logan phantom. In its original form, the contrast of the phantom is quite low. It is
shown enhanced here to facilitate viewing.

The key objective of CT is to obtain a 3-D representation of a volume from
its projections. As introduced intuitively in Section 5.11.1, the approach is to
back-project each projection and then sum all the backprojections to generate
one image (slice). Stacking all the resulting images produces a 3-D rendition of
the volume. To obtain a formal expression for a back-projected image from the
Radon transform, let us begin with a single point, g(rj, uk), of the complete
projection, g(r, uk), for a fixed value of rotation, uk (see Fig. 5.37). Forming
part of an image by back-projecting this single point is nothing more than
copying the line L(rj, uk) onto the image, where the value of each point in that
line is g(rj, uk). Repeating this process of all values of rj in the projected signal
(but keeping the value of u fixed at uk) results in the following expression:
fuk(x, y) = g(r, uk)
= g(x cos uk + y sin uk, uk)
for the image due to back-projecting the projection obtained with a fixed
angle, uk, as in Fig. 5.32(b). This equation holds for an arbitrary value of uk, so

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

373

we may write in general that the image formed from a single backprojection
obtained at an angle u is given by
fu (x, y) = g(x cos u + y sin u, u)

(5.11-5)

We form the final image by integrating over all the back-projected images:
p

f(x, y) =

L0

fu (x, y) du

(5.11-6)

In the discrete case, the integral becomes a sum of all the back-projected images:
p

f(x, y) = a fu (x, y)

(5.11-7)

u=0

where, x, y, and u are now discrete quantities. Recall from the discussion in
Section 5.11.1 that the projections at 0° and 180° are mirror images of each other,
so the summations are carried out to the last angle increment before 180°. For example, if 0.5° increments are being used, the summation is from 0 to 179.5 in halfdegree increments. A back-projected image formed in the manner just described
sometimes is referred to as a laminogram. It is understood implicitly that a
laminogram is only an approximation to the image from which the projections
were generated, a fact that is illustrated clearly in the following example.

■ Equation (5.11-7) was used to generate the back-projected images in Figs.
5.32 through 5.34, from projections obtained with Eq. (5.11-4). Similarly,
these equations were used to generate Figs. 5.40(a) and (b), which show the
back-projected images corresponding to the sinograms in Fig. 5.39(b) and
(d), respectively. As with the earlier figures, we note a significant amount of
blurring, so it is obvious that a straight use of Eqs. (5.11-4) and (5.11-7) will
not yield acceptable results. Early, experimental CT systems were based on
these equations. However, as you will see in Section 5.11.5, significant improvements in reconstruction are possible by reformulating the backprojection approach.
■

EXAMPLE 5.18:
Obtaining backprojected images
from sinograms.

a b
FIGURE 5.40

Backprojections
of the sinograms
in Fig. 5.39.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

374

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

5.11.4 The Fourier-Slice Theorem
In this section, we derive a fundamental result relating the 1-D Fourier transform of a projection and the 2-D Fourier transform of the region from which
the projection was obtained. This relationship is the basis for reconstruction
methods capable of dealing with the blurring problem just discussed.
The 1-D Fourier transform of a projection with respect to r is
q

G(v, u) =

L- q

g(r, u)e-j2pvr dr

(5.11-8)

where, as in Eq. (4.2-16), v is the frequency variable, and it is understood that
this expression is for a given value of u. Substituting Eq. (5.11-3) for g(r, u) results in the expression
q

G(v, u) =

f(x, y)d(x cos u + y sin - r)e-j2pvr dx dy dr

q

q

f(x, y) B

L- q L- q
q

=

q

L- q L- q L- q
q

=

q

L- q

d(x cos u + y sin u - r)e-j2pvr dr R dx dy
(5.11-9)

q

L- q L- q

f(x, y)e

-j2pv(x cos u + y sin u)

dx dy

where the last step follows from the property of the impulse mentioned earlier in this section. By letting u = v cos u and v = v sin u, Eq. (5.11-9) becomes
q

G(v, u) = B

q

L- q L- q

f(x, y)e-j2p(ux + vy) dx dy R

(5.11-10)
u = v cos u; v = v sin u

We recognize this expression as the 2-D Fourier transform of f(x, y) [see
Eq. (4.5-7)] evaluated at the values of u and v indicated. That is,
G(r, u) = [F(u, v)]u = v cos u; v = v sin u
= F(v cos u, v sin u)

(5.11-11)

where, as usual, F(u, v) denotes the 2-D Fourier transform of f(x, y).
Equation (5.11-11) is known as the Fourier-slice theorem (or the
projection-slice theorem). It states that the Fourier transform of a projection is a slice of the 2-D Fourier transform of the region from which the
projection was obtained. The reason for this terminology can be explained
with the aid of Fig. 5.41. As this figure shows, the 1-D Fourier transform of
an arbitrary projection is obtained by extracting the values of F(u, v) along
a line oriented at the same angle as the angle used in generating the projection. In principle, we could obtain f (x, y) simply by obtaining the inverse

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

375

FIGURE 5.41
v

y
2-D Fourier
transform
F (u, v)

Projection

u

f (x, y)

u
x

u

1-D Fourier
transform

Illustration of the
Fourier-slice theorem. The 1-D
Fourier transform
of a projection is
a slice of the 2-D
Fourier transform
of the region from
which the projection was obtained.
Note the correspondence of the
angle u.

Fourier transform of F (u, v) .† However, this is expensive computationally,
as it involves inverting a 2-D transform. The approach discussed in the following section is much more efficient.

5.11.5 Reconstruction Using Parallel-Beam Filtered
Backprojections
As we saw in Section 5.11.1 and in Example 5.18, obtaining backprojections
directly yields unacceptably blurred results. Fortunately, there is a straightforward solution to this problem based simply on filtering the projections before
computing the backprojections. From Eq. (4.5-8), the 2-D inverse Fourier
transform of F(u, v) is
q

f(x, y) =

q

L- q L- q

F(u, v)e j2p(ux + vy) du dv

(5.11-12)

If, as in Eqs. (5.11-10) and (5.11-11), we let u = v cos u and v = v sin u, then
the differentials become du dv = v dv du, and we can express Eq. (5.11-12) in
polar coordinates:
2p

f(x, y) =

L0

q

L0

F(v cos u, v sin u)e j2pv(x cos u + y sin u) v dv du

(5.11-13)

Then, using the Fourier-slice theorem,
2p

f(x, y) =

†

L0

q

L0

G(v, u)e j2pv(x cos u + y sin u)v dv du

(5.11-14)

Keep in mind that blurring will still be present in an image recovered using the inverse Fourier
transform, because the result is equivalent to the result obtained using the approach discussed in the
previous section.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

The relationship
du dv = v dv du is from
basic integral calculus,
where the Jacobian is
used as the basis for a
change of variables.

376

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

By splitting this integral into two expressions, one for u in the range 0° to
180° and the other in the range 180° to 360°, and using the fact that
G(v, u + 180°) = G(-v, u) (see Problem 5.32), we can express Eq. (5.11-14) as
p

f(x, y) =

L0

q

L- q

ƒ v ƒ G(v, u)e j2pv(x cos u + y sin u) dv du

(5.11-15)

In terms of integration with respect to v, the term x cos u + y sin u is a constant, which we recognize as r from Eq. (5.11-1). Thus, Eq. (5.11-15) can be
written as:
p

f(x, y) =

L0

q

B

L- q

ƒ v ƒ G(v, u)e j2pvr dv R

du (5.11-16)
r = x cos u + y sin r

The inner expression is in the form of an inverse 1-D Fourier transform [see
Eq. (4.2-17)], with the added term ƒ v ƒ which, based on the discussion in
Section 4.7, we recognize as a one-dimensional filter function. Observe that ƒ v ƒ
is a ramp filter [see Fig. 5.42(a)].† This function is not integrable because its
amplitude extends to + q in both directions, so the inverse Fourier transform
is undefined. Theoretically, this is handled by methods such as using so-called
generalized delta functions. In practice, the approach is to window the ramp so
it becomes zero outside of a defined frequency interval. That is, a window
band-limits the ramp filter.

a b
c d e
FIGURE 5.42

(a) Frequency
domain plot of the
filter ƒ v ƒ after bandlimiting it with a
box filter. (b) Spatial
domain
representation.
(c) Hamming
windowing function.
(d) Windowed ramp
filter, formed as the
product of (a) and
(c). (e) Spatial
representation of the
product (note the
decrease in ringing).

Frequency
domain

Frequency
domain

†

Spatial
domain

Frequency
domain

Spatial
domain

The ramp filter often is referred to as the Ram-Lak filter, after Ramachandran and Lakshminarayanan
[1971] who generally are credited with having been first to suggest it.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

The simplest approach to band-limit a function is to use a box in the frequency domain. However, as we saw in Fig. 4.4, a box has undesirable ringing
properties, so a smooth window is used instead. Figure 5.42(a) shows a plot of
the ramp filter after it was band-limited by a box window, and Fig. 5.42(b)
shows its spatial domain representation, obtained by computing its inverse
Fourier transform. As expected, the resulting windowed filter exhibits noticeable ringing in the spatial domain. We know from Chapter 4 that filtering in
the frequency domain is equivalent to convolution in the spatial domain, so
spatial filtering with a function that exhibits ringing will produce a result corrupted by ringing also. Windowing with a smooth function helps this situation.
An M-point discrete window function used frequently for implementation
with the 1-D FFT is given by

h(v) = c

c + (c - 1) cos
0

2pv
M - 1

0 … v … (M - 1)

(5.11-17)

otherwise

When c = 0.54, this function is called the Hamming window (named after
Richard Hamming) and, when c = 0.5, it is called the Hann window (named
after Julius von Hann).† The key difference between the Hamming and Hann
windows is that in the latter the end points are zero. The difference between
the two generally is imperceptible in image processing applications.
Figure 5.42(c) is a plot of the Hamming window, and Fig. 5.42(d) shows the
product of this window and the band-limited ramp filter in Fig. 5.42(a). Figure
5.42(e) shows the representation of the product in the spatial domain, obtained as usual by computing the inverse FFT. It is evident by comparing this
figure and Fig. 5.42(b) that ringing was reduced in the windowed ramp (the ratios of the peak to trough in Figs. 5.42(b) and (e) are 2.5 and 3.4, respectively).
On the other hand, because the width of the central lobe in Fig. 5.42(e) is
slightly wider than in Fig. 5.42(b), we would expect backprojections based on
using a Hamming window to have less ringing but be slightly more blurred. As
Example 5.19 shows, this indeed is the case.
Recall from Eq. (5.11-8) that G(v, u) is the 1-D Fourier transform of
g(r, u), which is a single projection obtained at a fixed angle, u. Equation
(5.11-16) states that the complete, back-projected image f(x,y) is obtained as
follows:
1. Compute the 1-D Fourier transform of each projection.
2. Multiply each Fourier transform by the filter function ƒ v ƒ which, as explained
above, has been multiplied by a suitable (e.g., Hamming) window.
3. Obtain the inverse 1-D Fourier transform of each resulting filtered
transform.
4. Integrate (sum) all the 1-D inverse transforms from step 3.
†

Sometimes the Hann window is referred to as the Hanning window in analogy to the Hamming window.
However, this terminology is incorrect and is a frequent source of confusion.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

377

378

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

Because a filter function is used, this image reconstruction approach is appropriately called filtered backprojection. In practice, the data are discrete, so all
frequency domain computations are carried out using a 1-D FFT algorithm,
and filtering is implemented using the same basic procedure explained in
Chapter 4 for 2-D functions. Alternatively, we can implement filtering in the
spatial domain using convolution, as explained later in this section.
The preceding discussion addresses the windowing aspects of filtered backprojections. As with any sampled data system, we also need to be concerned
about sampling rates. We know from Chapter 4 that the selection of sampling
rates has a profound influence on image processing results. In the present discussion, there are two sampling considerations. The first is the number of rays
used, which determines the number of samples in each projection. The second
is the number of rotation angle increments, which determines the number of
reconstructed images (whose sum yields the final image). Under-sampling results in aliasing which, as we saw in Chapter 4, can manifest itself as artifacts in
the image, such as streaks. We discuss CT sampling issues in more detail in
Section 5.11.6.

EXAMPLE 5.19:
Image reconstruction using filtered
backprojections.

■ The focus of this example is to show reconstruction using filtered backprojections, first with a ramp filter and then using a ramp filter modified by a
Hamming window. These filtered backprojections are compared against the
results of “raw” backprojections in Fig. 5.40. In order to focus on the difference
due only to filtering, the results in this example were generated with 0.5°
increments of rotation, which is the increment we used to generate Fig. 5.40.
The separation between rays was one pixel in both cases. The images in both
examples are of size 600 * 600 pixels, so the length of the diagonal is
22 * 600 L 849. Consequently, 849 rays were used to provide coverage of
the entire region when the angle of rotation was 45° and 135°.
Figure 5.43(a) shows the rectangle reconstructed using a ramp filter. The
most vivid feature of this result is the absence of any visually detectable blurring. As expected, however, ringing is present, visible as faint lines, especially
around the corners of the rectangle. These lines are more visible in the zoomed
section in Fig. 5.43(c). Using a Hamming window on the ramp filter helped
considerably with the ringing problem, at the expense of slight blurring, as
Figs. 5.43(b) and (d) show. The improvements (even with the ramp filter without windowing) over Fig. 5.40(a) are evident. The phantom image does not
have transitions that are as sharp and prominent as the rectangle so ringing,
even with the un-windowed ramp filter, is imperceptible in this case, as you can
see in Fig. 5.44(a). Using a Hamming window resulted in a slightly smoother
image, as Fig. 5.44(b) shows. Both of these results are considerable improvements over Fig. 5.40(b), illustrating again the significant advantage inherent in
the filtered-backprojection approach.
In most applications of CT (especially in medicine), artifacts such as ringing are a serious concern, so significant effort is devoted to minimizing
them. Tuning the filtering algorithms and, as explained in Section 5.11.2,

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

379

a b
c d
FIGURE 5.43

Filtered backprojections of the
rectangle using
(a) a ramp filter,
and (b) a
Hammingwindowed ramp
filter. The second
row shows
zoomed details of
the images in the
first row. Compare
with Fig. 5.40(a).

using a large number of detectors are among the design considerations that
help reduce these effects.
■

The preceding discussion is based on obtaining filtered backprojections via
an FFT implementation. However, we know from the convolution theorem in
Chapter 4 that equivalent results can be obtained using spatial convolution.
In particular, note that the term inside the brackets in Eq. (5.11-16) is the inverse Fourier transform of the product of two frequency domain functions

a b
FIGURE 5.44

Filtered
backprojections
of the head
phantom using
(a) a ramp filter,
and (b) a
Hammingwindowed ramp
filter. Compare
with Fig. 5.40(b).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

380

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

which, according to the convolution theorem, we know to be equal to the convolution of the spatial representations (inverse Fourier transforms) of these
two functions. In other words, letting s(r) denote the inverse Fourier transform of ƒ v ƒ ,† we write Eq. (5.11-16) as
p

f(x, y) =

q

B

L0

L- q

ƒ v ƒ G(v, u)e j2pvr dv R

du
r = x cos u + y sin r

p

=

[s(r)  g(r, u)]r = x cos u + y sin u du

L0
p

=

L0

(5.11-18)

q

B

L- q

g(r, u)s(x cos u + y sin u - r) dr R du

where, as in Chapter 4, “” denotes convolution. The second line follows from
the first for the reasons explained in the previous paragraph. The third line follows from the actual definition of convolution given in Eq. (4.2-20).
The last two lines of Eq. (5.11-18) say the same thing: Individual backprojections at an angle u can be obtained by convolving the corresponding projection, g(r, u), and the inverse Fourier transform of the ramp filter, s(r). As
before, the complete back-projected image is obtained by integrating (summing) all the individual back-projected images. With the exception of roundoff differences in computation, the results of using convolution will be
identical to the results using the FFT. In practical CT implementations, convolution generally turns out to be more efficient computationally, so most modern CT systems use this approach. The Fourier transform does play a central
role in theoretical formulations and algorithm development (for example, CT
image processing in MATLAB is based on the FFT). Also, we note that there
is no need to store all the back-projected images during reconstruction. Instead, a single running sum is updated with the latest back-projected image. At
the end of the procedure, the running sum will equal the sum total of all the
backprojections.
Finally, we point out that, because the ramp filter (even when it is windowed) zeros the dc term in the frequency domain, each backprojection image
will have a zero average value (see Fig. 4.30). This means that each backprojection image will have negative and positive pixels. When all the backprojections are added to form the final image, some negative locations may become
positive and the average value may not be zero, but typically, the final image
will still have negative pixels.
There are several ways to handle this problem. The simplest approach,
when there is no knowledge regarding what the average values should be, is to
accept the fact that negative values are inherent in the approach and scale the
†

If a windowing function, such as a Hamming window, is used, then the inverse Fourier transform is performed on the windowed ramp. Also, we again ignore the issue mentioned earlier regarding the existence of the continuous inverse Fourier transform because all implementations are carried out using
discrete quantities of finite length.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

381

result using the procedure described in Eqs. (2.6-10) and (2.6-11). This is the
approach followed in this section. When knowledge about what a “typical” average value should be is available, that value can be added to the filter in the
frequency domain, thus offsetting the ramp and preventing zeroing the dc
term [see Fig. 4.31(c)]. When working in the spatial domain with convolution,
the very act of truncating the length of the spatial filter (inverse Fourier transform of the ramp) prevents it from having a zero average value, thus avoiding
the zeroing problem altogether.

5.11.6 Reconstruction Using Fan-Beam Filtered Backprojections
The discussion thus far has centered on parallel beams. Because of its simplicity and intuitiveness, this is the imaging geometry used traditionally to
introduce computed tomography. However, modern CT systems use a fanbeam geometry (see Fig. 5.35), the topic of discussion for the remainder of
this section.
Figure 5.45 shows a basic fan-beam imaging geometry in which the detectors
are arranged on a circular arc and the angular increments of the source are assumed to be equal. Let p(a, b) denote a fan-beam projection, where a is the
angular position of a particular detector measured with respect to the center
ray, and b is the angular displacement of the source, measured with respect to
the y-axis, as shown in the figure. We also note in Fig. 5.45 that a ray in the fan
beam can be represented as a line, L(r, u), in normal form, which is the approach we used to represent a ray in the parallel-beam imaging geometry discussed in the previous sections. This allows us to utilize parallel-beam results as
FIGURE 5.45

y

Basic fan-beam
geometry. The line
passing through
the center of the
source and the
origin (assumed
here to be the
center of rotation
of the source) is
called the center
ray.

b
Source

D

a
r

u
x

L (r, u)
Center ray

www.EBooksWorld.ir

382

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

the starting point for deriving the corresponding equations for the fan-beam
geometry. We proceed to show this by deriving the fan-beam filtered backprojection based on convolution.†
We begin by noticing in Fig. 5.45 that the parameters of line L(r, u) are related to the parameters of a fan-beam ray by
u = b + a

(5.11-19)

r = D sin a

(5.11-20)

and

where D is the distance from the center of the source to the origin of the xyplane.
The convolution backprojection formula for the parallel-beam imaging geometry is given by Eq. (5.11-18).Without loss of generality, suppose that we focus attention on objects that are encompassed within a circular area of radius T about
the origin of the plane. Then g(r, u) = 0 for ƒ r ƒ 7 T and Eq. (5.11-18) becomes
f(x, y) =

1
2 L0

T

2p

L-T

g(r, u)s(x cos u + y sin u - r) drdu

(5.11-21)

where we used the fact stated in Section 5.11.1 that projections 180° apart are
mirror images of each other. In this way, the limits of the outer integral in Eq.
(5.11-21) are made to span a full circle, as required by a fan-beam arrangement
in which the detectors are arranged in a circle.
We are interested in integrating with respect to a and b. To do this, we start
by changing to polar coordinates (r, w). That is, we let x = r cos w and
y = r sin w, from which it follows that
x cos u + y sin u = r cos w cos u + r sin w sin u
= r cos(u - w)

(5.11-22)

Using this result, we can express Eq. (5.11-21) as
f(x, y) =

1
2 L0

2p

T

L-T

g(r, u)s[r cos(u - a) - r] drdu

This expression is nothing more than the parallel-beam reconstruction formula written in polar coordinates. However, integration still is with respect to r
and u. To integrate with respect to a and b requires a transformation of coordinates using Eqs. (5.11-19) and (5.11-20):
†

The Fourier-slice theorem was derived for a parallel-beam geometry and is not directly applicable to fan
beams. However, Eqs. (5.11-19) and (5.11-20) provide the basis for converting a fan-beam geometry to a
parallel-beam geometry, thus allowing us to use the filtered parallel backprojection approach developed
in the previous section, for which the slice theorem is applicable. We discuss this in more detail at the
end of this section.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections
FIGURE 5.46

y

Maximum value
of a needed to
encompass a
region of interest.

b
Source

am
a m
D
T

1
2 L-a

x

sin-1(T/D)

2p - a

f(r, w) =

Lsin-1(-T/D)

g(D sin a, a + b)
(5.11-23)

s[r cos(b + a - w) - D sin a]D cos a da db
where we used dr du = D cos a da db [see the explanation of Eq. (5.11-13)].
This equation can be simplified further. First, note that the limits -a to
2p - a for b span the entire range of 360°. Because all functions of b are periodic, with period 2p, the limits of the outer integral can be replaced by 0 and
2p, respectively. The term sin-1(T/D) has a maximum value, am, corresponding to ƒ r ƒ 7 T, beyond which g = 0 (see Fig. 5.46), so we can replace the limits of the inner integral by -am and am, respectively. Finally, consider the line
L(r, u) in Fig. 5.45. A raysum of a fan beam along this line must equal the raysum of a parallel beam along the same line (a raysum is a sum of all values
along a line, so the result must be the same for a given ray, regardless of the coordinate system is which it is expressed). This is true of any raysum for corresponding values of (a, b) and (r, u). Thus, letting p(a, b) denote a fan-beam
projection, it follows that p(a, b) = g(r, u) and, from Eqs. (5.11-19) and (5.11-20),
that p(a, b) = g(D sin a, a + b). Incorporating these observations into Eq.
(5.11-23) results in the expression
f(r, w) =

1
2 L0

2p

am

L-am

383

p(a, b)s[r cos(b + a - w) - D sin a] (5.11-24)
D cos a da db

www.EBooksWorld.ir

384

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

FIGURE 5.47

y

Polar representation of an arbitrary point on a
ray of a fan beam.

b
Source
R

a
D
r
w

bw

x

This is the fundamental fan-beam reconstruction formula based on filtered
backprojections.
Equation (5.11-24) can be manipulated further to put it in a more familiar convolution form. With reference to Fig. 5.47, it can be shown (Problem 5.33) that
r cos(b + a - w) - D sin a = R sin(a¿ - a)

(5.11-25)

where R is the distance from the source to an arbitrary point in a fan ray, and
a¿ is the angle between this ray and the center ray. Note that R and a¿ are determined by the values of r, w, and b. Substituting Eq. (5.11-25) into Eq.
(5.11-24) yields
f(r, w) =

1
2 L0

am

2p

L-am

p(a, b)s[R sin(a¿ - a)]D cos a da db

(5.11-26)

It can be shown (Problem 5.34) that
s(R sin a) = a

2
a
b s(a)
R sin a

(5.11-27)

Using this expression, we can write Eq. (5.11-26) as
2p

f(r, w) =

a

m
1
q(a, b)h(a¿ - a) da R db
B
2
L0 R L-am

www.EBooksWorld.ir

(5.11-28)

5.11 ■ Image Reconstruction from Projections

where
h(a) =

1
a 2
a
b s(a)
2 sin a

(5.11-29)

and
q(a, b) = p(a, b) D cos a

(5.11-30)

We recognize the inner integral in Eq. (5.11-28) as a convolution expression, thus showing that the image reconstruction formula in Eq. (5.11-24)
can be implemented as the convolution of functions q(a, b) and h(a). Unlike the reconstruction formula for parallel projections, reconstruction
based on fan-beam projections involves a term 1>R2, which is a weighting
factor inversely proportional to the distance from the source. The computational details of implementing Eq. (5.11-28) are beyond the scope of the
present discussion (see Kak and Slaney [2001] for a detailed treatment of
this subject).
Instead of implementing Eq. (5.11-28) directly, an approach used often, particularly in software simulations, is (1) to convert a fan-beam geometry to a
parallel-beam geometry using Eqs. (5.11-19) and (5.11-20), and (2) use the
parallel-beam reconstruction approach developed in Section 5.11.5. We conclude this section with an example of how this is done. As noted earlier, a fanbeam projection, p, taken at angle b has a corresponding parallel-beam
projection, g, taken at a corresponding angle u and, therefore,
p(a, b) = g(r, u)
= g(D sin a, a + b)

(5.11-31)

where the second line follows from Eqs. (5.11-19) and (5.11-20).
Let ¢ b denote the angular increment between successive fan-beam
projections and let ¢a be the angular increment between rays, which determines the number of samples in each projection. We impose the restriction that
¢ b = ¢a = g

(5.11-32)

Then, b = mg and a = ng for some integer values of m and n, and we can
write Eq. (5.11-31) as
p(ng, mg) = g[D sin ng, (m + n)g]

(5.11-33)

This equation indicates that the nth ray in the mth radial projection is equal to
the nth ray in the (m + n)th parallel projection. The D sin g term on the right
side of (5.11-33) implies that parallel projections converted from fan-beam
projections are not sampled uniformly, an issue that can lead to blurring, ringing, and aliasing artifacts if the sampling intervals ¢a and ¢b are too coarse,
as the following example illustrates.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

385

386

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction

EXAMPLE 5.20:
Image
reconstruction
using filtered fan
backprojections.

■ Figure 5.48(a) shows the results of (1) generating fan projections of the rectangle image with ¢a = ¢b = 1°, (2) converting each fan ray to the corresponding parallel ray using Eq. (5.11-33), and (3) using the filtered
backprojection approach developed in Section 5.11.5 for parallel rays. Figures
5.48(b) through (d) show the results using 0.5°, 0.25°, and 0.125° increments. A
Hamming window was used in all cases. This variety of angle increments was
used to illustrate the effects of under-sampling.
The result in Fig. 5.48(a) is a clear indication that 1° increments are too
coarse, as blurring and ringing are quite evident. The result in (b) is interesting,
in the sense that it compares poorly with Fig. 5.43(b), which was generated
using the same angle increment of 0.5°. In fact, as Fig. 5.48(c) shows, even with
angle increments of 0.25° the reconstruction still is not as good as in Fig.
5.43(b). We have to use angle increments on the order of 0.125° before the two
results become comparable, as Fig. 5.48(d) shows. This angle increment results
in projections with 180 * (1>0.25) = 720 samples, which is close to the 849
rays used in the parallel projections of Example 5.19. Thus, it is not unexpected that the results are close in appearance when using ¢a = 0.125°.
Similar results were obtained with the head phantom, except that aliasing is
much more visible as sinusoidal interference. We see in Fig. 5.49(c) that even
with ¢a = ¢b = 0.25 significant distortion still is present, especially in the periphery of the ellipse. As with the rectangle, using increments of 0.125° finally

a b
c d
FIGURE 5.48

Reconstruction of
the rectangle
image from
filtered fan
backprojections.
(a) 1° increments
of a and b. (b) 0.5°
increments.
(c) 0.25° increments. (d) 0.125°
increments.
Compare (d) with
Fig. 5.43(b).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Summary

387

a b
c d
FIGURE 5.49

Reconstruction of
the head phantom
image from
filtered fan
backprojections.
(a) 1° increments
of a and b.
(b) 0.5° increments.
(c) 0.25° increments. (d) 0.125°
increments.
Compare (d) with
Fig. 5.44(b).

produced results that are comparable with the back-projected image of the head
phantom in Fig. 5.44(b). These results illustrate one of the principal reasons why
thousands of detectors have to be used in the fan-beam geometry of modern CT
systems in order to reduce aliasing artifacts.
■

Summary
The restoration results in this chapter are based on the assumption that image degradation
can be modeled as a linear, position invariant process followed by additive noise that is not
correlated with image values. Even when these assumptions are not entirely valid, it often is
possible to obtain useful results by using the methods developed in the preceding sections.
Some of the restoration techniques derived in this chapter are based on various criteria of optimality. Use of the word “optimal” in this context refers strictly to a mathematical concept, not to optimal response of the human visual system. In fact, the
present lack of knowledge about visual perception precludes a general formulation of
the image restoration problem that takes into account observer preferences and capabilities. In view of these limitations, the advantage of the concepts introduced in this
chapter is the development of fundamental approaches that have reasonably predictable behavior and are supported by a solid body of knowledge.
As in Chapters 3 and 4, certain restoration tasks, such as random-noise reduction, are
carried out in the spatial domain using convolution masks. The frequency domain was
found ideal for reducing periodic noise and for modeling some important degradations,
such as blur caused by motion during image acquisition. We also found the frequency

www.EBooksWorld.ir

388

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction
domain to be a useful tool for formulating restoration filters, such as the Wiener and
constrained least-squares filters.
As mentioned in Chapter 4, the frequency domain offers an intuitive, solid base for
experimentation. Once an approach (filter) has been found to perform satisfactorily
for a given application, implementation usually is carried out via the design of a digital
filter that approximates the frequency domain solution, but runs much faster in a computer or in a dedicated hardware/firmware system, as indicated at the end of Chapter 4.
Our treatment of image reconstruction from projections, though introductory, is the
foundation for the image-processing aspects of this field. As noted in Section 5.11, computed tomography (CT) is the main application area of image reconstruction from projections. Although we focused on X-ray tomography, the principles established in
Section 5.11 are applicable in other CT imaging modalities, such as SPECT (single photon emission tomography), PET (positron emission tomography), MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), and some modalities of ultrasound imaging.

References and Further Reading
For additional reading on the linear model of degradation in Section 5.1, see Castleman
[1996] and Pratt [1991]. The book by Peebles [1993] provides an intermediate-level coverage of noise probability density functions and their properties (Section 5.2). The book by
Papoulis [1991] is more advanced and covers these concepts in more detail. References for
Section 5.3 are Umbaugh [2005], Boie and Cox [1992], Hwang and Haddad [1995], and
Wilburn [1998]. See Eng and Ma [2001, 2006] regarding adaptive median filtering. The
general area of adaptive filter design is good background for the adaptive filters discussed
in Section 5.3.The book by Haykin [1996] is a good introduction to this topic.The filters in
Section 5.4 are direct extensions of the material in Chapter 4. For additional reading on
the material of Section 5.5, see Rosenfeld and Kak [1982] and Pratt [1991].
The topic of estimating the degradation function (Section 5.6) is an area of considerable current interest. Some of the early techniques for estimating the degradation function are given in Andrews and Hunt [1977], Rosenfeld and Kak [1982], Bates and
McDonnell [1986], and Stark [1987]. Since the degradation function seldom is known exactly, a number of techniques have been proposed over the years, in which specific aspects of restoration are emphasized. For example, Geman and Reynolds [1992] and Hurn
and Jennison [1996] deal with issues of preserving sharp intensity transitions in an attempt
to emphasize sharpness, while Boyd and Meloche [1998] are concerned with restoring
thin objects in degraded images. Examples of techniques that deal with image blur are
Yitzhaky et al. [1998], Harikumar and Bresler [1999], Mesarovic [2000], and Giannakis
and Heath [2000]. Restoration of sequences of images also is of considerable interest.The
book by Kokaram [1998] provides a good foundation in this area.
The filtering approaches discussed in Sections 5.7 through 5.10 have been explained
in various ways over the years in numerous books and articles on image processing.
There are two major approaches underpinning the development of these filters. One is
based on a general formulation using matrix theory, as introduced by Andrews and
Hunt [1977]. This approach is elegant and general, but it is difficult for newcomers to
the field because it lacks intuitiveness. Approaches based directly on frequency domain
filtering (the approach we followed in this chapter) usually are easier to follow by those
who first encounter restoration, but lack the unifying mathematical rigor of the matrix
approach. Both approaches arrive at the same results, but our experience in teaching
this material in a variety of settings indicates that students first entering this field favor
the latter approach by a significant margin. Complementary readings for our coverage
of the filtering concepts presented in Sections 5.7 through 5.10 are Castleman [1996],

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

389

Umbaugh [2005], and Petrou and Bosdogianni [1999]. This last reference also presents
a nice tie between two-dimensional frequency domain filters and the corresponding
digital filters. On the design of 2-D digital filters, see Lu and Antoniou [1992].
Basic references for computed tomography are Rosenfeld and Kak [1982], Kak and
Slaney [2001], and Prince and Links [2006]. For further reading on the Shepp-Logan
phantom see Shepp and Logan [1974], and for additional details on the origin of the
Ram-Lak filter see Ramachandran and Lakshminarayanan [1971]. The paper by
O’Connor and Fessler [2006] is representative of current research in the signal and
image processing aspects of computed tomography.
For software techniques to implement most of the material discussed in this chapter
see Gonzalez, Woods, and Eddins [2004].

Problems
 5.1

The white bars in the test pattern shown are 7 pixels wide and 210 pixels high.
The separation between bars is 17 pixels. What would this image look like after
application of
(a) A 3 * 3 arithmetic mean filter?
(b) A 7 * 7 arithmetic mean filter?
(c) A 9 * 9 arithmetic mean filter?

Note: This problem and the ones that follow it, related to filtering this image,
may seem a bit tedious. However, they are worth the effort, as they help develop
a real understanding of how these filters work. After you understand how a particular filter affects the image, your answer can be a brief verbal description of
the result. For example, “the resulting image will consist of vertical bars 3 pixels
wide and 206 pixels high.” Be sure to describe any deformation of the bars, such
as rounded corners. You may ignore image border effects, in which the masks
only partially contain image pixels.
5.2

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a geometric mean filter.

 5.3

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a harmonic mean filter.

5.4

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a contraharmonic mean filter with Q = 1.

 5.5

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a contraharmonic mean filter with Q = -1.

5.6

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a median filter.

 5.7

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a max filter.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Detailed solutions to the
problems marked with a
star can be found in the
book Web site.The site also
contains suggested projects
based on the material in
this chapter.

390

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction
5.8
 5.9
5.10

Repeat Problem 5.1 using a min filter.
Repeat Problem 5.1 using a midpoint filter.
The two subimages shown were extracted from the top right corners of Figs.
5.7(c) and (d), respectively. Thus, the subimage on the left is the result of using
an arithmetic mean filter of size 3 * 3; the other subimage is the result of using
a geometric mean filter of the same size.
(a) Explain why the subimage obtained with geometric mean filtering is less
blurred. (Hint: Start your analysis by examining a 1-D step transition in
intensity.)
(b) Explain why the black components in the right image are thicker.

5.11

Refer to the contraharmonic filter given in Eq. (5.3-6).
(a) Explain why the filter is effective in elimination pepper noise when Q is
positive.
(b) Explain why the filter is effective in eliminating salt noise when Q is
negative.
(c) Explain why the filter gives poor results (such as the results shown in Fig.
5.9) when the wrong polarity is chosen for Q.
(d) Discuss the behavior of the filter when Q = - 1.
(e) Discuss (for positive and negative Q) the behavior of the filter in areas of
constant intensity levels.

 5.12

Obtain equations for the bandpass filters corresponding to the bandreject filters
in Table 4.6.

5.13

Obtain equations for Gaussian and ideal notch reject filters in the form of
Eq. (4.10-5).

 5.14

Show that the Fourier transform of the 2-D continuous sine function
f(x, y) = A sin(u0x + v0y)
is the pair of conjugate impulses

F(u, v) = -j

u0
v0
u0
v0
A
,v ,v +
Bd¢u ≤ - d¢u +
≤R
2
2p
2p
2p
2p

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

[Hint: Use the continuous version of the Fourier transform in Eq. (4.5-7), and
express the sine in terms of exponentials.]
5.15
 5.16

Start with Eq. (5.4-11) and derive Eq. (5.4-13).
Consider a linear, position-invariant image degradation system with impulse
response
2

2

h(x - a, y - b) = e-[(x - a) + (y - b) ]
Suppose that the input to the system is an image consisting of a line of infinitesimal width located at x = a, and modeled by f(x, y) = d(x - a), where d is an
impulse. Assuming no noise, what is the output image g(x, y)?
5.17

During acquisition, an image undergoes uniform linear motion in the vertical direction for a time T1. The direction of motion then switches to the horizontal direction for a time interval T2. Assuming that the time it takes the image to
change directions is negligible, and that shutter opening and closing times are
negligible also, give an expression for the blurring function, H(u, v).

 5.18

Consider the problem of image blurring caused by uniform acceleration in the
x-direction. If the image is at rest at time t = 0 and accelerates with a uniform
acceleration x0(t) = at2>2 for a time T, find the blurring function H(u, v). You
may assume that shutter opening and closing times are negligible.

5.19

A space probe is designed to transmit images from a planet as it approaches it for
landing. During the last stages of landing, one of the control thrusters fails, resulting in rapid rotation of the craft about its vertical axis. The images sent during the
last two seconds prior to landing are blurred as a consequence of this circular motion. The camera is located in the bottom of the probe, along its vertical axis, and
pointing down. Fortunately, the rotation of the craft is also about its vertical axis,
so the images are blurred by uniform rotational motion. During the acquisition
time of each image the craft rotation was limited to p>8 radians. The image acquisition process can be modeled as an ideal shutter that is open only during the time
the craft rotated the p>8 radians. You may assume that vertical motion was negligible during image acquisition. Formulate a solution for restoring the images.

 5.20

The image shown is a blurred, 2-D projection of a volumetric rendition of a
heart. It is known that each of the cross hairs on the right bottom part of the
image was 3 pixels wide, 30 pixels long, and had an intensity value of 255 before
blurring. Provide a step-by-step procedure indicating how you would use the information just given to obtain the blurring function H(u, v).

(Original image courtesy of G.E. Medical Systems.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

391

392

Chapter 5 ■ Image Restoration and Reconstruction
5.21

A certain X-ray imaging geometry produces a blurring degradation that can be
modeled as the convolution of the sensed image with the spatial, circularly symmetric function
h1x, y2 =

x2 + y2 - 2s2
4

s

x2 + y2

e- 2s

2

Assuming continuous variables, show that the degradation in the frequency domain is given by the expression
2 2

2

2

H(u, v) = - 8p2s2(u2 + v2)e-2p s (u + v )
(Hint: Refer to Section 4.9.4, entry 13 in Table 4.3, and Problem 4.26.)
 5.22

Using the transfer function in Problem 5.21, give the expression for a Wiener filter, assuming that the ratio of power spectra of the noise and undegraded signal
is a constant.

5.23

Using the transfer function in Problem 5.21, give the resulting expression for the
constrained least squares filter.

5.24

Assume that the model in Fig. 5.1 is linear and position invariant and that the
noise and image are uncorrelated. Show that the power spectrum of the output is
ƒ G(u, v) ƒ 2 = ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2 ƒ F(u, v) ƒ 2 + ƒ N(u, v) ƒ 2
Refer to Eqs. (5.5-17) and (4.6-18).

5.25

Cannon [1974] suggested a restoration filter R(u, v) satisfying the condition
N
ƒ F(u,
v) ƒ 2 = ƒ R(u, v) ƒ 2 ƒ G(u, v) ƒ 2
and based on the premise of forcing the power spectrum of the restored image,
N
ƒ F(u,
v) ƒ 2, to equal the power spectrum of the original image, ƒ F(u, v) ƒ 2. Assume
that the image and noise are uncorrelated.
(a) Find R(u, v) in terms of ƒ F(u, v) ƒ 2, ƒ H(u, v) ƒ 2, and ƒ N(u, v) ƒ 2. [Hint: Refer
to Fig. 5.1, Eq. (5.5-17), and Problem 5.24.]
(b) Use your result in (a) to state a result in the form of Eq. (5.8-2).

5.26

An astronomer working with a large-scale telescope observes that her images
are a little blurry. The manufacturer tells the astronomer that the unit is operating within specifications. The telescope lenses focus images onto a high-resolution, CCD imaging array, and the images are then converted by the telescope
electronics into digital images. Trying to improve the situation by conducting
controlled lab experiments with the lenses and imaging sensors is not possible
due to the size and weight of the telescope components. The astronomer, having
heard about your success as an image processing expert, calls you to help her
formulate a digital image processing solution for sharpening the images a little
more. How would you go about solving this problem, given that the only images
you can obtain are images of stellar bodies?

 5.27

A professor of archeology doing research on currency exchange practices during the Roman Empire recently became aware that four Roman coins crucial to
his research are listed in the holdings of the British Museum in London. Unfortunately, he was told after arriving there that the coins recently had been stolen.
Further research on his part revealed that the museum keeps photographs of

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

every item for which it is responsible. Unfortunately, the photos of the coins in
question are blurred to the point where the date and other small markings are
not readable. The cause of the blurring was the camera being out of focus when
the pictures were taken. As an image processing expert and friend of the professor, you are asked as a favor to determine whether computer processing can be
utilized to restore the images to the point where the professor can read the
markings. You are told that the original camera used to take the photos is still
available, as are other representative coins of the same era. Propose a step-bystep solution to this problem.
5.28

Sketch the Radon transform of the following square images. Label quantitatively
all the important features of your sketches. Figure (a) consists of one dot in the
center, and (b) has two dots along the diagonal. Describe your solution to (c) by
an intensity profile. Assume a parallel-beam geometry.

(a)

5.29

(b)

(c)

Show that the Radon transform [Eq. (5.11-3)] of the Gaussian shape
f(x, y) = A exp(- x2 - y2) is g(r, u) = A1p exp( -r2). (Hint: Refer to
Example 5.17, where we used symmetry to simplify integration.)

5.30  (a) Show that the Radon transform [Eq. (5.11-3)] of the unit impulse d(x, y) is a
straight vertical line in the ru-plane passing through the origin.
(b) Show that the radon transform of the impulse d(x - x0, y - y0) is a sinusoidal curve in the ru-plane.
5.31

Prove the validity of the following properties of the Radon transform [Eq. (5.11-3)]:
 (a) Linearity: The Radon transform is a linear operator. (See Section 2.6.2
regarding the definition of linear operators.)
(b) Translation property: The radon transform of f(x - x0, y - y0) is
g(r - x0 cosu - y0 sinu, u).
 (c) Convolution property: Show that the Radon transform of the convolution
of two functions is equal to the convolution of the Radon transforms of the
two functions.

5.32

Provide the steps leading from Eq. (5.11-14) to (5.11-15). You will need to use
the property G(v, u + 180°) = G(-v, u).

 5.33

Prove the validity of Eq. (5.11-25).

5.34

Prove the validity of Eq. (5.11-27).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

393

6

Color Image Processing
It is only after years of preparation that the young artist should touch
color—not color used descriptively, that is, but as a means of
personal expression.
Henri Matisse
For a long time I limited myself to one color—as a form of discipline.
Pablo Picasso

Preview
The use of color in image processing is motivated by two principal factors.
First, color is a powerful descriptor that often simplifies object identification
and extraction from a scene. Second, humans can discern thousands of color
shades and intensities, compared to about only two dozen shades of gray. This
second factor is particularly important in manual (i.e., when performed by humans) image analysis.
Color image processing is divided into two major areas: full-color and
pseudocolor processing. In the first category, the images in question typically
are acquired with a full-color sensor, such as a color TV camera or color scanner. In the second category, the problem is one of assigning a color to a particular monochrome intensity or range of intensities. Until relatively recently,
most digital color image processing was done at the pseudocolor level. However, in the past decade, color sensors and hardware for processing color images have become available at reasonable prices. The result is that full-color
image processing techniques are now used in a broad range of applications, including publishing, visualization, and the Internet.
It will become evident in the discussions that follow that some of the gray-scale
methods covered in previous chapters are directly applicable to color images.

394
www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.1 ■ Color Fundamentals

395

Others require reformulation to be consistent with the properties of the color
spaces developed in this chapter. The techniques described here are far from exhaustive; they illustrate the range of methods available for color image processing.

6.1

Color Fundamentals

Although the process followed by the human brain in perceiving and interpreting color is a physiopsychological phenomenon that is not fully understood, the physical nature of color can be expressed on a formal basis
supported by experimental and theoretical results.
In 1666, Sir Isaac Newton discovered that when a beam of sunlight passes
through a glass prism, the emerging beam of light is not white but consists instead of a continuous spectrum of colors ranging from violet at one end to red
at the other. As Fig. 6.1 shows, the color spectrum may be divided into six
broad regions: violet, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red. When viewed in full
color (Fig. 6.2), no color in the spectrum ends abruptly, but rather each color
blends smoothly into the next.
Basically, the colors that humans and some other animals perceive in an object
are determined by the nature of the light reflected from the object. As illustrated
in Fig. 6.2, visible light is composed of a relatively narrow band of frequencies in
the electromagnetic spectrum.A body that reflects light that is balanced in all visible wavelengths appears white to the observer. However, a body that favors reflectance in a limited range of the visible spectrum exhibits some shades of color.
For example, green objects reflect light with wavelengths primarily in the 500 to
570 nm range while absorbing most of the energy at other wavelengths.
FIGURE 6.1 Color

spectrum seen by
passing white
light through a
prism. (Courtesy
of the General
Electric Co.,
Lamp Business
Division.)

FIGURE 6.2 Wavelengths comprising the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum.

(Courtesy of the General Electric Co., Lamp Business Division.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

396

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

Characterization of light is central to the science of color. If the light is
achromatic (void of color), its only attribute is its intensity, or amount. Achromatic light is what viewers see on a black and white television set, and it has
been an implicit component of our discussion of image processing thus far. As
defined in Chapter 2, and used numerous times since, the term gray level
refers to a scalar measure of intensity that ranges from black, to grays, and finally to white.
Chromatic light spans the electromagnetic spectrum from approximately
400 to 700 nm. Three basic quantities are used to describe the quality of a
chromatic light source: radiance, luminance, and brightness. Radiance is the
total amount of energy that flows from the light source, and it is usually measured in watts (W). Luminance, measured in lumens (lm), gives a measure of
the amount of energy an observer perceives from a light source. For example,
light emitted from a source operating in the far infrared region of the spectrum could have significant energy (radiance), but an observer would hardly
perceive it; its luminance would be almost zero. Finally, brightness is a subjective descriptor that is practically impossible to measure. It embodies the
achromatic notion of intensity and is one of the key factors in describing
color sensation.
As noted in Section 2.1.1, cones are the sensors in the eye responsible for
color vision. Detailed experimental evidence has established that the 6 to 7 million cones in the human eye can be divided into three principal sensing categories, corresponding roughly to red, green, and blue. Approximately 65% of all
cones are sensitive to red light, 33% are sensitive to green light, and only about
2% are sensitive to blue (but the blue cones are the most sensitive). Figure 6.3
shows average experimental curves detailing the absorption of light by the red,
green, and blue cones in the eye. Due to these absorption characteristics of the
535 nm

Red

www.EBooksWorld.ir

600

650

700 nm
Red

550

Reddish orange

Blue green

500
Blue

450
Purplish blue

400

Green

575 nm

Yellow
Orange

Blue

Yellowish green

Absorption (arbitrary units)

445 nm

Bluish purple

Absorption of
light by the red,
green, and blue
cones in the
human eye as a
function of
wavelength.

Green

FIGURE 6.3

6.1 ■ Color Fundamentals

397

human eye, colors are seen as variable combinations of the so-called primary
colors red (R), green (G), and blue (B). For the purpose of standardization, the
CIE (Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage—the International Commission on Illumination) designated in 1931 the following specific wavelength values to the three primary colors: blue = 435.8 nm, green = 546.1 nm, and
red = 700 nm. This standard was set before the detailed experimental curves
shown in Fig. 6.3 became available in 1965. Thus, the CIE standards correspond
only approximately with experimental data. We note from Figs. 6.2 and 6.3 that
no single color may be called red, green, or blue. Also, it is important to keep in
mind that having three specific primary color wavelengths for the purpose of
standardization does not mean that these three fixed RGB components acting
alone can generate all spectrum colors. Use of the word primary has been widely
misinterpreted to mean that the three standard primaries, when mixed in various intensity proportions, can produce all visible colors. As you will see shortly,
this interpretation is not correct unless the wavelength also is allowed to vary,
in which case we would no longer have three fixed, standard primary colors.
The primary colors can be added to produce the secondary colors of light—
magenta (red plus blue), cyan (green plus blue), and yellow (red plus green).
Mixing the three primaries, or a secondary with its opposite primary color, in
the right intensities produces white light. This result is shown in Fig. 6.4(a),
which also illustrates the three primary colors and their combinations to produce the secondary colors.

MIXTURES OF LIGHT
(Additive primaries)
GREEN

YELLOW

CYAN
WHITE

RED

MAGENTA

BLUE

MIXTURES OF PIGMENTS
(Subtractive primaries)
YELLOW

RED

GREEN
BLACK

MAGENTA

BLUE

CYAN

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY COLORS
OF LIGHT AND PIGMENT

www.EBooksWorld.ir

a
b
FIGURE 6.4

Primary and
secondary colors
of light and
pigments.
(Courtesy of the
General Electric
Co., Lamp
Business
Division.)

398

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

Differentiating between the primary colors of light and the primary colors
of pigments or colorants is important. In the latter, a primary color is defined
as one that subtracts or absorbs a primary color of light and reflects or transmits the other two. Therefore, the primary colors of pigments are magenta,
cyan, and yellow, and the secondary colors are red, green, and blue. These colors are shown in Fig. 6.4(b). A proper combination of the three pigment primaries, or a secondary with its opposite primary, produces black.
Color television reception is an example of the additive nature of light colors. The interior of CRT (cathode ray tube) color TV screens is composed of a
large array of triangular dot patterns of electron-sensitive phosphor. When excited, each dot in a triad produces light in one of the primary colors. The intensity of the red-emitting phosphor dots is modulated by an electron gun inside
the tube, which generates pulses corresponding to the “red energy” seen by
the TV camera. The green and blue phosphor dots in each triad are modulated
in the same manner. The effect, viewed on the television receiver, is that the
three primary colors from each phosphor triad are “added” together and received by the color-sensitive cones in the eye as a full-color image. Thirty successive image changes per second in all three colors complete the illusion of a
continuous image display on the screen.
CRT displays are being replaced by “flat panel” digital technologies, such as
liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and plasma devices. Although they are fundamentally different from CRTs, these and similar technologies use the same
principle in the sense that they all require three subpixels (red, green, and
blue) to generate a single color pixel. LCDs use properties of polarized light to
block or pass light through the LCD screen and, in the case of active matrix
display technology, thin film transistors (TFTs) are used to provide the proper
signals to address each pixel on the screen. Light filters are used to produce
the three primary colors of light at each pixel triad location. In plasma units,
pixels are tiny gas cells coated with phosphor to produce one of the three primary colors. The individual cells are addressed in a manner analogous to
LCDs. This individual pixel triad coordinate addressing capability is the foundation of digital displays.
The characteristics generally used to distinguish one color from another are
brightness, hue, and saturation. As indicated earlier in this section, brightness
embodies the achromatic notion of intensity. Hue is an attribute associated
with the dominant wavelength in a mixture of light waves. Hue represents
dominant color as perceived by an observer. Thus, when we call an object red,
orange, or yellow, we are referring to its hue. Saturation refers to the relative
purity or the amount of white light mixed with a hue. The pure spectrum colors
are fully saturated. Colors such as pink (red and white) and lavender (violet
and white) are less saturated, with the degree of saturation being inversely
proportional to the amount of white light added.
Hue and saturation taken together are called chromaticity, and, therefore, a
color may be characterized by its brightness and chromaticity. The amounts of
red, green, and blue needed to form any particular color are called the

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.1 ■ Color Fundamentals

tristimulus values and are denoted, X, Y, and Z, respectively. A color is then
specified by its trichromatic coefficients, defined as
X
X + Y + Z
Y
y =
X + Y + Z

x =

(6.1-1)
(6.1-2)

and
z =

Z
X + Y + Z

(6.1-3)

It is noted from these equations that†
x + y + z = 1

(6.1-4)

For any wavelength of light in the visible spectrum, the tristimulus values
needed to produce the color corresponding to that wavelength can be obtained directly from curves or tables that have been compiled from extensive
experimental results (Poynton [1996]. See also the early references by Walsh
[1958] and by Kiver [1965]).
Another approach for specifying colors is to use the CIE chromaticity diagram (Fig. 6.5), which shows color composition as a function of x (red) and y
(green). For any value of x and y, the corresponding value of z (blue) is obtained from Eq. (6.1-4) by noting that z = 1 - (x + y). The point marked
green in Fig. 6.5, for example, has approximately 62% green and 25% red content. From Eq. (6.1-4), the composition of blue is approximately 13%.
The positions of the various spectrum colors—from violet at 380 nm to red
at 780 nm—are indicated around the boundary of the tongue-shaped chromaticity diagram. These are the pure colors shown in the spectrum of Fig. 6.2.
Any point not actually on the boundary but within the diagram represents
some mixture of spectrum colors. The point of equal energy shown in Fig. 6.5
corresponds to equal fractions of the three primary colors; it represents the
CIE standard for white light. Any point located on the boundary of the chromaticity chart is fully saturated. As a point leaves the boundary and approaches the point of equal energy, more white light is added to the color and it
becomes less saturated. The saturation at the point of equal energy is zero.
The chromaticity diagram is useful for color mixing because a straight-line
segment joining any two points in the diagram defines all the different color
variations that can be obtained by combining these two colors additively. Consider, for example, a straight line drawn from the red to the green points shown
in Fig. 6.5. If there is more red light than green light, the exact point representing the new color will be on the line segment, but it will be closer to the red
point than to the green point. Similarly, a line drawn from the point of equal
†

The use of x, y, z in this context follows notational convention. These should not be confused with the
use of (x, y) to denote spatial coordinates in other sections of the book.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

399

400

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

FIGURE 6.5

Chromaticity
diagram.
(Courtesy of the
General Electric
Co., Lamp
Business
Division.)

energy to any point on the boundary of the chart will define all the shades of
that particular spectrum color.
Extension of this procedure to three colors is straightforward. To determine
the range of colors that can be obtained from any three given colors in the
chromaticity diagram, we simply draw connecting lines to each of the three
color points. The result is a triangle, and any color on the boundary or inside
the triangle can be produced by various combinations of the three initial colors. A triangle with vertices at any three fixed colors cannot enclose the entire
color region in Fig. 6.5. This observation supports graphically the remark made
earlier that not all colors can be obtained with three single, fixed primaries.
The triangle in Figure 6.6 shows a typical range of colors (called the color
gamut) produced by RGB monitors. The irregular region inside the triangle
is representative of the color gamut of today’s high-quality color printing

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.2 ■ Color Models
FIGURE 6.6

.9

Typical color
gamut of color
monitors
(triangle) and
color printing
devices (irregular
region).

520
530

.8

540

510

G
.7

550

560

.6
570

500

.5

y-axis

580

590

.4
600
610

R

.3

620

490

640
780

.2
480

.1
470
460
450

0
0

.1

B
380

.2

.3

.4
x-axis

.5

.6

.7

.8

devices. The boundary of the color printing gamut is irregular because color
printing is a combination of additive and subtractive color mixing, a process
that is much more difficult to control than that of displaying colors on a
monitor, which is based on the addition of three highly controllable light
primaries.

6.2

401

Color Models

The purpose of a color model (also called color space or color system) is to facilitate the specification of colors in some standard, generally accepted way. In
essence, a color model is a specification of a coordinate system and a subspace
within that system where each color is represented by a single point.
Most color models in use today are oriented either toward hardware (such
as for color monitors and printers) or toward applications where color manipulation is a goal (such as in the creation of color graphics for animation). In

www.EBooksWorld.ir

402

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

terms of digital image processing, the hardware-oriented models most commonly used in practice are the RGB (red, green, blue) model for color monitors and a broad class of color video cameras; the CMY (cyan, magenta,
yellow) and CMYK (cyan, magenta, yellow, black) models for color printing;
and the HSI (hue, saturation, intensity) model, which corresponds closely with
the way humans describe and interpret color. The HSI model also has the advantage that it decouples the color and gray-scale information in an image,
making it suitable for many of the gray-scale techniques developed in this
book. There are numerous color models in use today due to the fact that color
science is a broad field that encompasses many areas of application. It is
tempting to dwell on some of these models here simply because they are interesting and informative. However, keeping to the task at hand, the models discussed in this chapter are leading models for image processing. Having
mastered the material in this chapter, you will have no difficulty in understanding additional color models in use today.

6.2.1 The RGB Color Model
In the RGB model, each color appears in its primary spectral components of
red, green, and blue. This model is based on a Cartesian coordinate system.
The color subspace of interest is the cube shown in Fig. 6.7, in which RGB primary values are at three corners; the secondary colors cyan, magenta, and yellow are at three other corners; black is at the origin; and white is at the corner
farthest from the origin. In this model, the gray scale (points of equal RGB
values) extends from black to white along the line joining these two points.
The different colors in this model are points on or inside the cube, and are defined by vectors extending from the origin. For convenience, the assumption
is that all color values have been normalized so that the cube shown in Fig. 6.7
is the unit cube. That is, all values of R, G, and B are assumed to be in the
range [0, 1].
FIGURE 6.7

Schematic of the
RGB color cube.
Points along the
main diagonal
have gray values,
from black at the
origin to white at
point (1, 1, 1).

B

Blue

(0, 0, 1)

Cyan

Magenta

White

Black

Gray scale

(0, 1, 0)
Green

(1, 0, 0)
Red
R

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Yellow

G

6.2 ■ Color Models

403

FIGURE 6.8 RGB

24-bit color cube.

Images represented in the RGB color model consist of three component
images, one for each primary color. When fed into an RGB monitor, these
three images combine on the screen to produce a composite color image, as
explained in Section 6.1. The number of bits used to represent each pixel in
RGB space is called the pixel depth. Consider an RGB image in which each of
the red, green, and blue images is an 8-bit image. Under these conditions each
RGB color pixel [that is, a triplet of values (R, G, B)] is said to have a depth of
24 bits (3 image planes times the number of bits per plane). The term full-color
image is used often to denote a 24-bit RGB color image. The total number of
colors in a 24-bit RGB image is (28)3 = 16,777,216. Figure 6.8 shows the 24-bit
RGB color cube corresponding to the diagram in Fig. 6.7.

■ The cube shown in Fig. 6.8 is a solid, composed of the (28)3 = 16,777,216
colors mentioned in the preceding paragraph. A convenient way to view these
colors is to generate color planes (faces or cross sections of the cube). This is
accomplished simply by fixing one of the three colors and allowing the other
two to vary. For instance, a cross-sectional plane through the center of the cube
and parallel to the GB-plane in Fig. 6.8 is the plane (127, G, B) for
G, B = 0, 1, 2, Á , 255. Here we used the actual pixel values rather than the
mathematically convenient normalized values in the range [0, 1] because the
former values are the ones actually used in a computer to generate colors.
Figure 6.9(a) shows that an image of the cross-sectional plane is viewed simply
by feeding the three individual component images into a color monitor. In the
component images, 0 represents black and 255 represents white (note that
these are gray-scale images). Finally, Fig. 6.9(b) shows the three hidden surface
planes of the cube in Fig. 6.8, generated in the same manner.
It is of interest to note that acquiring a color image is basically the process
shown in Fig. 6.9 in reverse. A color image can be acquired by using three filters, sensitive to red, green, and blue, respectively. When we view a color scene
with a monochrome camera equipped with one of these filters, the result is a
monochrome image whose intensity is proportional to the response of that filter. Repeating this process with each filter produces three monochrome images that are the RGB component images of the color scene. (In practice,
RGB color image sensors usually integrate this process into a single device.)
Clearly, displaying these three RGB component images in the form shown in
Fig. 6.9(a) would yield an RGB color rendition of the original color scene. ■
www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 6.1:
Generating the
hidden face
planes and a cross
section of the
RGB color cube.

404

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a
b
FIGURE 6.9

(a) Generating
the RGB image of
the cross-sectional
color plane (127,
G, B). (b) The
three hidden
surface planes in
the color cube of
Fig. 6.8.

Red

Green

Color
monitor

RGB

Blue

(R  0)

(G  0)

(B  0)

While high-end display cards and monitors provide a reasonable rendition
of the colors in a 24-bit RGB image, many systems in use today are limited to
256 colors. Also, there are numerous applications in which it simply makes no
sense to use more than a few hundred, and sometimes fewer, colors. A good
example of this is provided by the pseudocolor image processing techniques
discussed in Section 6.3. Given the variety of systems in current use, it is of
considerable interest to have a subset of colors that are likely to be reproduced faithfully, reasonably independently of viewer hardware capabilities.
This subset of colors is called the set of safe RGB colors, or the set of allsystems-safe colors. In Internet applications, they are called safe Web colors or
safe browser colors.
On the assumption that 256 colors is the minimum number of colors that
can be reproduced faithfully by any system in which a desired result is likely to
be displayed, it is useful to have an accepted standard notation to refer to
these colors. Forty of these 256 colors are known to be processed differently by
various operating systems, leaving only 216 colors that are common to most
systems. These 216 colors have become the de facto standard for safe colors,
especially in Internet applications. They are used whenever it is desired that
the colors viewed by most people appear the same.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.2 ■ Color Models
Number System
Hex
Decimal

Color Equivalents
00
0

33
51

66
102

99
153

CC
204

FF
255

405

TABLE 6.1
Valid values of
each RGB
component in a
safe color.

Each of the 216 safe colors is formed from three RGB values as before, but
each value can only be 0, 51, 102, 153, 204, or 255. Thus, RGB triplets of these
values give us (6)3 = 216 possible values (note that all values are divisible by
3). It is customary to express these values in the hexagonal number system, as
shown in Table 6.1. Recall that hex numbers 0, 1, 2, Á , 9, A, B, C, D, E, F
correspond to decimal numbers 0, 1, 2, Á , 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Recall
also that (0)16 = (0000)2 and (F)16 = (1111)2. Thus, for example,
(FF)16 = (255)10 = (11111111)2 and we see that a grouping of two hex numbers forms an 8-bit byte.
Since it takes three numbers to form an RGB color, each safe color is
formed from three of the two digit hex numbers in Table 6.1. For example, the
purest red is FF0000. The values 000000 and FFFFFF represent black and
white, respectively. Keep in mind that the same result is obtained by using the
more familiar decimal notation. For instance, the brightest red in decimal notation has R = 255 (FF) and G = B = 0.
Figure 6.10(a) shows the 216 safe colors, organized in descending RGB values. The square in the top left array has value FFFFFF (white), the second
square to its right has value FFFFCC, the third square has value FFFF99, and
a
b
FIGURE 6.10

www.EBooksWorld.ir

FFFFFF

EEEEEE

DDDDDD

CCCCCC

BBBBBB

AAAAAA

999999

888888

777777

666666

555555

444444

333333

222222

111111

000000

(a) The 216 safe
RGB colors.
(b) All the grays
in the 256-color
RGB system
(grays that are
part of the safe
color group are
shown
underlined).

406

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

so on for the first row. The second row of that same array has values FFCCFF,
FFCCCC, FFCC99, and so on. The final square of that array has value FF0000
(the brightest possible red). The second array to the right of the one just examined starts with value CCFFFF and proceeds in the same manner, as do the
other remaining four arrays. The final (bottom right) square of the last array
has value 000000 (black). It is important to note that not all possible 8-bit gray
colors are included in the 216 safe colors. Figure 6.10(b) shows the hex codes
for all the possible gray colors in a 256-color RGB system. Some of these values are outside of the safe color set but are represented properly (in terms of
their relative intensities) by most display systems. The grays from the safe
color group, (KKKKKK)16, for K = 0, 3, 6, 9, C, F, are shown underlined in
Fig. 6.10(b).
Figure 6.11 shows the RGB safe-color cube. Unlike the full-color cube in
Fig. 6.8, which is solid, the cube in Fig. 6.11 has valid colors only on the surface planes. As shown in Fig. 6.10(a), each plane has a total of 36 colors, so
the entire surface of the safe-color cube is covered by 216 different colors, as
expected.

6.2.2 The CMY and CMYK Color Models
As indicated in Section 6.1, cyan, magenta, and yellow are the secondary colors
of light or, alternatively, the primary colors of pigments. For example, when a
surface coated with cyan pigment is illuminated with white light, no red light is
reflected from the surface. That is, cyan subtracts red light from reflected white
light, which itself is composed of equal amounts of red, green, and blue light.
Most devices that deposit colored pigments on paper, such as color printers
and copiers, require CMY data input or perform an RGB to CMY conversion
internally. This conversion is performed using the simple operation
C
1
R
CMS = C1S - CGS
Y
1
B

(6.2-1)

where, again, the assumption is that all color values have been normalized to
the range [0, 1]. Equation (6.2-1) demonstrates that light reflected from a
FIGURE 6.11

The RGB safecolor cube.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.2 ■ Color Models

surface coated with pure cyan does not contain red (that is, C = 1 - R in the
equation). Similarly, pure magenta does not reflect green, and pure yellow
does not reflect blue. Equation (6.2-1) also reveals that RGB values can be
obtained easily from a set of CMY values by subtracting the individual CMY
values from 1. As indicated earlier, in image processing this color model is
used in connection with generating hardcopy output, so the inverse operation from CMY to RGB generally is of little practical interest.
According to Fig. 6.4, equal amounts of the pigment primaries, cyan, magenta, and yellow should produce black. In practice, combining these colors
for printing produces a muddy-looking black. So, in order to produce true
black (which is the predominant color in printing), a fourth color, black, is
added, giving rise to the CMYK color model. Thus, when publishers talk about
“four-color printing,” they are referring to the three colors of the CMY color
model plus black.

6.2.3 The HSI Color Model
As we have seen, creating colors in the RGB and CMY models and changing
from one model to the other is a straightforward process. As noted earlier,
these color systems are ideally suited for hardware implementations. In addition, the RGB system matches nicely with the fact that the human eye is
strongly perceptive to red, green, and blue primaries. Unfortunately, the
RGB, CMY, and other similar color models are not well suited for describing
colors in terms that are practical for human interpretation. For example, one
does not refer to the color of an automobile by giving the percentage of each
of the primaries composing its color. Furthermore, we do not think of color
images as being composed of three primary images that combine to form that
single image.
When humans view a color object, we describe it by its hue, saturation, and
brightness. Recall from the discussion in Section 6.1 that hue is a color attribute that describes a pure color (pure yellow, orange, or red), whereas saturation gives a measure of the degree to which a pure color is diluted by white
light. Brightness is a subjective descriptor that is practically impossible to measure. It embodies the achromatic notion of intensity and is one of the key factors in describing color sensation. We do know that intensity (gray level) is a
most useful descriptor of monochromatic images. This quantity definitely is
measurable and easily interpretable. The model we are about to present, called
the HSI (hue, saturation, intensity) color model, decouples the intensity component from the color-carrying information (hue and saturation) in a color
image. As a result, the HSI model is an ideal tool for developing image processing algorithms based on color descriptions that are natural and intuitive to
humans, who, after all, are the developers and users of these algorithms. We
can summarize by saying that RGB is ideal for image color generation (as in
image capture by a color camera or image display in a monitor screen), but its
use for color description is much more limited. The material that follows provides an effective way to do this.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

407

408

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

As discussed in Example 6.1, an RGB color image can be viewed as three
monochrome intensity images (representing red, green, and blue), so it should
come as no surprise that we should be able to extract intensity from an RGB
image.This becomes rather clear if we take the color cube from Fig. 6.7 and stand
it on the black (0, 0, 0) vertex, with the white vertex (1, 1, 1) directly above it, as
shown in Fig. 6.12(a). As noted in connection with Fig. 6.7, the intensity (gray
scale) is along the line joining these two vertices. In the arrangement shown in
Fig. 6.12, the line (intensity axis) joining the black and white vertices is vertical.
Thus, if we wanted to determine the intensity component of any color point in
Fig. 6.12, we would simply pass a plane perpendicular to the intensity axis and
containing the color point. The intersection of the plane with the intensity axis
would give us a point with intensity value in the range [0, 1]. We also note with a
little thought that the saturation (purity) of a color increases as a function of distance from the intensity axis. In fact, the saturation of points on the intensity axis
is zero, as evidenced by the fact that all points along this axis are gray.
In order to see how hue can be determined also from a given RGB point,
consider Fig. 6.12(b), which shows a plane defined by three points (black,
white, and cyan). The fact that the black and white points are contained in the
plane tells us that the intensity axis also is contained in the plane. Furthermore, we see that all points contained in the plane segment defined by the intensity axis and the boundaries of the cube have the same hue (cyan in this
case). We would arrive at the same conclusion by recalling from Section 6.1
that all colors generated by three colors lie in the triangle defined by those colors. If two of those points are black and white and the third is a color point, all
points on the triangle would have the same hue because the black and white
components cannot change the hue (of course, the intensity and saturation of
points in this triangle would be different). By rotating the shaded plane about
the vertical intensity axis, we would obtain different hues. From these concepts
we arrive at the conclusion that the hue, saturation, and intensity values required to form the HSI space can be obtained from the RGB color cube. That
is, we can convert any RGB point to a corresponding point in the HSI color
model by working out the geometrical formulas describing the reasoning outlined in the preceding discussion.
a b
FIGURE 6.12

Conceptual
relationships
between the RGB
and HSI color
models.

White

White

Magenta
Cyan

Blue

Magenta
Yellow

Cyan

Red

Blue

Green

Black

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Yellow

Red
Green

Black

6.2 ■ Color Models

The key point to keep in mind regarding the cube arrangement in Fig. 6.12
and its corresponding HSI color space is that the HSI space is represented by a
vertical intensity axis and the locus of color points that lie on planes
perpendicular to this axis. As the planes move up and down the intensity axis,
the boundaries defined by the intersection of each plane with the faces of the
cube have either a triangular or hexagonal shape. This can be visualized much
more readily by looking at the cube down its gray-scale axis, as shown in
Fig. 6.13(a). In this plane we see that the primary colors are separated by 120°.
The secondary colors are 60° from the primaries, which means that the angle
between secondaries also is 120°. Figure 6.13(b) shows the same hexagonal
shape and an arbitrary color point (shown as a dot). The hue of the point is determined by an angle from some reference point. Usually (but not always) an
angle of 0° from the red axis designates 0 hue, and the hue increases counterclockwise from there. The saturation (distance from the vertical axis) is the
length of the vector from the origin to the point. Note that the origin is defined
by the intersection of the color plane with the vertical intensity axis. The important components of the HSI color space are the vertical intensity axis, the
length of the vector to a color point, and the angle this vector makes with the
red axis. Therefore, it is not unusual to see the HSI planes defined is terms of
the hexagon just discussed, a triangle, or even a circle, as Figs. 6.13(c) and (d)
show. The shape chosen does not matter because any one of these shapes can
be warped into one of the other two by a geometric transformation. Figure 6.14
shows the HSI model based on color triangles and also on circles.

Green

Yellow

White

Cyan

Red

Blue
Green

Yellow

Magenta
Green

Green

S

S
H

Cyan

Yellow

Red

Cyan

H

Yellow Cyan

S

Red

H

Blue

Magenta

Blue

Magenta

Red

Blue

Magenta

a
b c d
FIGURE 6.13 Hue and saturation in the HSI color model. The dot is an arbitrary color

point. The angle from the red axis gives the hue, and the length of the vector is the
saturation. The intensity of all colors in any of these planes is given by the position of
the plane on the vertical intensity axis.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

409

410

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a
b
FIGURE 6.14 The

HSI color model
based on
(a) triangular and
(b) circular color
planes. The
triangles and
circles are
perpendicular to
the vertical
intensity axis.

White
I  0.75

I
Green
Cyan
I  0.5

H

Yellow

S
Magenta

Blue

Red

Black
White
I  0.75

I

Green

Yellow
H

I  0.5 Cyan

S
Blue

Red

Magenta

Black

Converting colors from RGB to HSI
Computations from RGB
to HSI and back are
carried out on a per-pixel
basis. We omitted the
dependence on (x, y) of
the conversion equations
for notational clarity.

Given an image in RGB color format, the H component of each RGB pixel is
obtained using the equation
H = b

u
360 - u

www.EBooksWorld.ir

if B … G
if B 7 G

(6.2-2)

6.2 ■ Color Models

411

with†
u = cos b
-1

1
2 [(R - G) + (R - B)]
2

[(R - G) + (R - B)(G - B)]1>2

r

The saturation component is given by
3
[min(R, G, B)]
(R + G + B)
Finally, the intensity component is given by
S = 1 -

(6.2-3)

1
(6.2-4)
(R + G + B)
3
It is assumed that the RGB values have been normalized to the range [0, 1]
and that angle u is measured with respect to the red axis of the HSI space, as
indicated in Fig. 6.13. Hue can be normalized to the range [0, 1] by dividing by
360° all values resulting from Eq. (6.2-2). The other two HSI components already are in this range if the given RGB values are in the interval [0, 1].
The results in Eqs. (6.2-2) through (6.2-4) can be derived from the geometry
shown in Figs. 6.12 and 6.13. The derivation is tedious and would not add significantly to the present discussion. The interested reader can consult the
book’s references or Web site for a proof of these equations, as well as for the
following HSI to RGB conversion results.
I =

Converting colors from HSI to RGB
Given values of HSI in the interval [0, 1], we now want to find the corresponding RGB values in the same range. The applicable equations depend on the
values of H. There are three sectors of interest, corresponding to the 120° intervals in the separation of primaries (see Fig. 6.13). We begin by multiplying
H by 360°, which returns the hue to its original range of [0°, 360°].
RG sector (0° … H 6 120°): When H is in this sector, the RGB components
are given by the equations
B = I(1 - S)
R = Ic1 +

(6.2-5)

S cos H
d
cos(60° - H)

(6.2-6)

and
G = 3I - (R + B)

(6.2-7)

GB sector (120° … H 6 240°): If the given value of H is in this sector, we first
subtract 120° from it:
H = H - 120°
†

(6.2-8)

It is good practice to add a small number in the denominator of this expression to avoid dividing by 0
when R = G = B, in which case u will be 90°. Note that when all RGB components are equal, Eq. (6.2-3)
gives S = 0. In addition, the conversion from HSI back to RGB in Eqs. (6.2-5) through (6.2-7) will give
R = G = B = I, as expected, because when R = G = B, we are dealing with a gray-scale image.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Consult the Tutorials section of the book Web site
for a detailed derivation
of the conversion equations between RGB and
HSI, and vice versa.

412

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

Then the RGB components are
R = I(1 - S)
G = Ic1 +

S cos H
d
cos(60° - H)

(6.2-9)
(6.2-10)

and
B = 3I - (R + G)

(6.2-11)

BR sector (240° … H … 360°): Finally, if H is in this range, we subtract 240°
from it:
(6.2-12)
H = H - 240°
Then the RGB components are
G = I(1 - S)
B = Ic1 +

S cos H
d
cos(60° - H)

(6.2-13)
(6.2-14)

and
R = 3I - (G + B)

(6.2-15)

Uses of these equations for image processing are discussed in several of the
following sections.
EXAMPLE 6.2:
The HSI values
corresponding to
the image of the
RGB color cube.

■ Figure 6.15 shows the hue, saturation, and intensity images for the RGB
values shown in Fig. 6.8. Figure 6.15(a) is the hue image. Its most distinguishing
feature is the discontinuity in value along a 45° line in the front (red) plane of
the cube. To understand the reason for this discontinuity, refer to Fig. 6.8, draw
a line from the red to the white vertices of the cube, and select a point in the
middle of this line. Starting at that point, draw a path to the right, following the
cube around until you return to the starting point. The major colors encountered in this path are yellow, green, cyan, blue, magenta, and back to red. According to Fig. 6.13, the values of hue along this path should increase from 0°

a b c
FIGURE 6.15 HSI components of the image in Fig. 6.8. (a) Hue, (b) saturation, and (c) intensity images.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.2 ■ Color Models

413

to 360° (i.e., from the lowest to highest possible values of hue). This is precisely what Fig. 6.15(a) shows because the lowest value is represented as black and
the highest value as white in the gray scale. In fact, the hue image was originally normalized to the range [0, 1] and then scaled to 8 bits; that is, it was converted to the range [0, 255], for display.
The saturation image in Fig. 6.15(b) shows progressively darker values toward the white vertex of the RGB cube, indicating that colors become less and
less saturated as they approach white. Finally, every pixel in the intensity
image shown in Fig. 6.15(c) is the average of the RGB values at the corresponding pixel in Fig. 6.8.
■

Manipulating HSI component images
In the following discussion, we take a look at some simple techniques for manipulating HSI component images. This will help you develop familiarity with
these components and also help you deepen your understanding of the HSI color
model. Figure 6.16(a) shows an image composed of the primary and secondary
RGB colors. Figures 6.16(b) through (d) show the H, S, and I components of
this image, generated using Eqs. (6.2-2) through (6.2-4). Recall from the discussion earlier in this section that the gray-level values in Fig. 6.16(b) correspond to angles; thus, for example, because red corresponds to 0°, the red
region in Fig. 6.16(a) is mapped to a black region in the hue image. Similarly,
the gray levels in Fig. 6.16(c) correspond to saturation (they were scaled to
[0, 255] for display), and the gray levels in Fig. 6.16(d) are average intensities.

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.16

(a) RGB image
and the components of its
corresponding
HSI image:
(b) hue,
(c) saturation, and
(d) intensity.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

414

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.17

(a)–(c) Modified
HSI component
images.
(d) Resulting
RGB image. (See
Fig. 6.16 for the
original HSI
images.)

To change the individual color of any region in the RGB image, we change
the values of the corresponding region in the hue image of Fig. 6.16(b). Then
we convert the new H image, along with the unchanged S and I images, back to
RGB using the procedure explained in connection with Eqs. (6.2-5) through
(6.2-15). To change the saturation (purity) of the color in any region, we follow
the same procedure, except that we make the changes in the saturation image
in HSI space. Similar comments apply to changing the average intensity of any
region. Of course, these changes can be made simultaneously. For example, the
image in Fig. 6.17(a) was obtained by changing to 0 the pixels corresponding to
the blue and green regions in Fig. 6.16(b). In Fig. 6.17(b) we reduced by half
the saturation of the cyan region in component image S from Fig. 6.16(c). In
Fig. 6.17(c) we reduced by half the intensity of the central white region in the
intensity image of Fig. 6.16(d). The result of converting this modified HSI
image back to RGB is shown in Fig. 6.17(d). As expected, we see in this figure
that the outer portions of all circles are now red; the purity of the cyan region
was diminished, and the central region became gray rather than white. Although these results are simple, they illustrate clearly the power of the HSI
color model in allowing independent control over hue, saturation, and intensity, quantities with which we are quite familiar when describing colors.

6.3

Pseudocolor Image Processing

Pseudocolor (also called false color) image processing consists of assigning colors to gray values based on a specified criterion. The term pseudo or false color
is used to differentiate the process of assigning colors to monochrome images
www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.3 ■ Pseudocolor Image Processing

415

from the processes associated with true color images, a topic discussed starting
in Section 6.4. The principal use of pseudocolor is for human visualization and
interpretation of gray-scale events in an image or sequence of images. As noted
at the beginning of this chapter, one of the principal motivations for using color
is the fact that humans can discern thousands of color shades and intensities,
compared to only two dozen or so shades of gray.

6.3.1 Intensity Slicing
The technique of intensity (sometimes called density) slicing and color coding is
one of the simplest examples of pseudocolor image processing. If an image is interpreted as a 3-D function [see Fig. 2.18(a)], the method can be viewed as one
of placing planes parallel to the coordinate plane of the image; each plane then
“slices” the function in the area of intersection. Figure 6.18 shows an example of
using a plane at f(x, y) = li to slice the image function into two levels.
If a different color is assigned to each side of the plane shown in Fig. 6.18,
any pixel whose intensity level is above the plane will be coded with one color,
and any pixel below the plane will be coded with the other. Levels that lie on
the plane itself may be arbitrarily assigned one of the two colors. The result is
a two-color image whose relative appearance can be controlled by moving the
slicing plane up and down the intensity axis.
In general, the technique may be summarized as follows. Let [0, L - 1]
represent the gray scale, let level l0 represent black [f(x, y) = 0], and level
lL - 1 represent white [f(x, y) = L - 1]. Suppose that P planes perpendicular
to the intensity axis are defined at levels l1, l2, Á , lP. Then, assuming that
0 6 P 6 L - 1, the P planes partition the gray scale into P + 1 intervals,
V1, V2, Á , VP + 1. Intensity to color assignments are made according to the relation
f(x, y) = ck
(6.3-1)
if f(x, y) H Vk
FIGURE 6.18

f (x, y)
Intensity axis

Geometric
interpretation of
the intensityslicing technique.

(White) L  1
Slicing plane
li

(Black) 0

y

x

www.EBooksWorld.ir

416

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

FIGURE 6.19 An

alternative
representation of
the intensityslicing technique.
Color

c2

c1

li

0

L1

Intensity levels

where ck is the color associated with the kth intensity interval Vk defined by
the partitioning planes at l = k - 1 and l = k.
The idea of planes is useful primarily for a geometric interpretation of the
intensity-slicing technique. Figure 6.19 shows an alternative representation
that defines the same mapping as in Fig. 6.18. According to the mapping function shown in Fig. 6.19, any input intensity level is assigned one of two colors,
depending on whether it is above or below the value of li. When more levels
are used, the mapping function takes on a staircase form.
EXAMPLE 6.3:
Intensity slicing.

■ A simple, but practical, use of intensity slicing is shown in Fig. 6.20. Figure
6.20(a) is a monochrome image of the Picker Thyroid Phantom (a radiation
test pattern), and Fig. 6.20(b) is the result of intensity slicing this image into
eight color regions. Regions that appear of constant intensity in the monochrome image are really quite variable, as shown by the various colors in the
sliced image. The left lobe, for instance, is a dull gray in the monochrome
image, and picking out variations in intensity is difficult. By contrast, the color
image clearly shows eight different regions of constant intensity, one for each
■
of the colors used.

a b
FIGURE 6.20

(a) Monochrome
image of the Picker
Thyroid Phantom.
(b) Result of
density slicing into
eight colors.
(Courtesy of Dr.
J. L. Blankenship,
Instrumentation
and Controls
Division, Oak
Ridge National
Laboratory.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.3 ■ Pseudocolor Image Processing

417

In the preceding simple example, the gray scale was divided into intervals and
a different color was assigned to each region, without regard for the meaning of
the gray levels in the image. Interest in that case was simply to view the different
gray levels constituting the image. Intensity slicing assumes a much more meaningful and useful role when subdivision of the gray scale is based on physical
characteristics of the image. For instance, Fig. 6.21(a) shows an X-ray image of a
weld (the horizontal dark region) containing several cracks and porosities (the
bright, white streaks running horizontally through the middle of the image). It
is known that when there is a porosity or crack in a weld, the full strength of the
X-rays going through the object saturates the imaging sensor on the other side of
the object.Thus, intensity values of 255 in an 8-bit image coming from such a system automatically imply a problem with the weld. If a human were to be the ultimate judge of the analysis, and manual processes were employed to inspect welds
(still a common procedure today), a simple color coding that assigns one color to
a
b
FIGURE 6.21

(a) Monochrome
X-ray image of a
weld. (b) Result
of color coding.
(Original image
courtesy of
X-TEK Systems,
Ltd.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

418

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

level 255 and another to all other intensity levels would simplify the inspector’s
job considerably. Figure 6.21(b) shows the result. No explanation is required to
arrive at the conclusion that human error rates would be lower if images were
displayed in the form of Fig. 6.21(b), instead of the form shown in Fig. 6.21(a). In
other words, if the exact intensity value or range of values one is looking for is
known, intensity slicing is a simple but powerful aid in visualization, especially if
numerous images are involved. The following is a more complex example.
EXAMPLE 6.4:
Use of color to
highlight rainfall
levels.

■ Measurement of rainfall levels, especially in the tropical regions of the
Earth, is of interest in diverse applications dealing with the environment. Accurate measurements using ground-based sensors are difficult and expensive to
acquire, and total rainfall figures are even more difficult to obtain because a
significant portion of precipitation occurs over the ocean. One approach for obtaining rainfall figures is to use a satellite. The TRMM (Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission) satellite utilizes, among others, three sensors specially designed
to detect rain: a precipitation radar, a microwave imager, and a visible and infrared scanner (see Sections 1.3 and 2.3 regarding image sensing modalities).
The results from the various rain sensors are processed, resulting in estimates of average rainfall over a given time period in the area monitored by the
sensors. From these estimates, it is not difficult to generate gray-scale images
whose intensity values correspond directly to rainfall, with each pixel representing a physical land area whose size depends on the resolution of the sensors. Such an intensity image is shown in Fig. 6.22(a), where the area monitored
by the satellite is the slightly lighter horizontal band in the middle one-third of
the picture (these are the tropical regions). In this particular example, the rainfall values are average monthly values (in inches) over a three-year period.
Visual examination of this picture for rainfall patterns is quite difficult, if
not impossible. However, suppose that we code intensity levels from 0 to 255
using the colors shown in Fig. 6.22(b). Values toward the blues signify low values of rainfall, with the opposite being true for red. Note that the scale tops out
at pure red for values of rainfall greater than 20 inches. Figure 6.22(c) shows
the result of color coding the gray image with the color map just discussed. The
results are much easier to interpret, as shown in this figure and in the zoomed
area of Fig. 6.22(d). In addition to providing global coverage, this type of data
allows meteorologists to calibrate ground-based rain monitoring systems with
greater precision than ever before.
■
6.3.2 Intensity to Color Transformations
Other types of transformations are more general and thus are capable of
achieving a wider range of pseudocolor enhancement results than the simple
slicing technique discussed in the preceding section. An approach that is particularly attractive is shown in Fig. 6.23. Basically, the idea underlying this approach is to perform three independent transformations on the intensity of any
input pixel. The three results are then fed separately into the red, green, and
blue channels of a color television monitor. This method produces a composite
image whose color content is modulated by the nature of the transformation

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.3 ■ Pseudocolor Image Processing

419

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.22 (a) Gray-scale image in which intensity (in the lighter horizontal band shown) corresponds to

average monthly rainfall. (b) Colors assigned to intensity values. (c) Color-coded image. (d) Zoom of the
South American region. (Courtesy of NASA.)

FIGURE 6.23

f(x, y)

Red
transformation

fR (x, y)

Green
transformation

fG (x, y)

Blue
transformation

fB (x, y)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Functional block
diagram for
pseudocolor
image processing.
fR, fG, and fB are
fed into the
corresponding
red, green, and
blue inputs of an
RGB color
monitor.

420

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

functions. Note that these are transformations on the intensity values of an
image and are not functions of position.
The method discussed in the previous section is a special case of the technique just described. There, piecewise linear functions of the intensity levels
(Fig. 6.19) are used to generate colors. The method discussed in this section, on
the other hand, can be based on smooth, nonlinear functions, which, as might
be expected, gives the technique considerable flexibility.
EXAMPLE 6.5:
Use of
pseudocolor for
highlighting
explosives
contained in
luggage.

■ Figure 6.24(a) shows two monochrome images of luggage obtained from an
airport X-ray scanning system. The image on the left contains ordinary articles.
The image on the right contains the same articles, as well as a block of simulated
plastic explosives. The purpose of this example is to illustrate the use of intensity level to color transformations to obtain various degrees of enhancement.
Figure 6.25 shows the transformation functions used. These sinusoidal functions contain regions of relatively constant value around the peaks as well as
regions that change rapidly near the valleys. Changing the phase and frequency of each sinusoid can emphasize (in color) ranges in the gray scale. For instance, if all three transformations have the same phase and frequency, the
output image will be monochrome. A small change in the phase between the
three transformations produces little change in pixels whose intensities correspond to peaks in the sinusoids, especially if the sinusoids have broad profiles
(low frequencies). Pixels with intensity values in the steep section of the sinusoids are assigned a much stronger color content as a result of significant differences between the amplitudes of the three sinusoids caused by the phase
displacement between them.

a
b c
FIGURE 6.24

Pseudocolor
enhancement by
using the gray
level to color
transformations in
Fig. 6.25.
(Original image
courtesy of
Dr. Mike Hurwitz,
Westinghouse.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.3 ■ Pseudocolor Image Processing

421

a
b

L1

FIGURE 6.25
Red

Transformation
functions used to
obtain the images
in Fig. 6.24.

L1
Green

L1
Blue
0
Explosive

Intensity
L1
Garment Background
bag

L1
Red

L1
Green

L1
Blue
0
Explosive

Intensity
L1
Garment Background
bag

The image shown in Fig. 6.24(b) was obtained with the transformation
functions in Fig. 6.25(a), which shows the gray-level bands corresponding to
the explosive, garment bag, and background, respectively. Note that the explosive and background have quite different intensity levels, but they were
both coded with approximately the same color as a result of the periodicity of
the sine waves. The image shown in Fig. 6.24(c) was obtained with the transformation functions in Fig. 6.25(b). In this case the explosives and garment
bag intensity bands were mapped by similar transformations and thus received essentially the same color assignments. Note that this mapping allows
an observer to “see” through the explosives. The background mappings were
about the same as those used for Fig. 6.24(b), producing almost identical color
assignments.
■
www.EBooksWorld.ir

422

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

FIGURE 6.26 A

pseudocolor
coding approach
used when several
monochrome
images are
available.

g 1 (x, y)
f 1 (x, y)

Transformation T1

f 2 (x, y)

Transformation T2

f K (x, y)

Transformation TK

h R (x, y)
g 2 (x, y)

Additional
processing

hG (x, y)

g K (x, y)
hB (x, y)

The approach shown in Fig. 6.23 is based on a single monochrome image.
Often, it is of interest to combine several monochrome images into a single
color composite, as shown in Fig. 6.26. A frequent use of this approach (illustrated in Example 6.6) is in multispectral image processing, where different
sensors produce individual monochrome images, each in a different spectral
band. The types of additional processes shown in Fig. 6.26 can be techniques
such as color balancing (see Section 6.5.4), combining images, and selecting
the three images for display based on knowledge about response characteristics of the sensors used to generate the images.
EXAMPLE 6.6:
Color coding of
multispectral
images.

■ Figures 6.27(a) through (d) show four spectral satellite images of Washington, D.C., including part of the Potomac River. The first three images are in the
visible red, green, and blue, and the fourth is in the near infrared (see Table 1.1
and Fig. 1.10). Figure 6.27(e) is the full-color image obtained by combining the
first three images into an RGB image. Full-color images of dense areas are difficult to interpret, but one notable feature of this image is the difference in
color in various parts of the Potomac River. Figure 6.27(f) is a little more interesting.This image was formed by replacing the red component of Fig. 6.27(e)
with the near-infrared image. From Table 1.1, we know that this band is strongly responsive to the biomass components of a scene. Figure 6.27(f) shows quite
clearly the difference between biomass (in red) and the human-made features
in the scene, composed primarily of concrete and asphalt, which appear bluish
in the image.
The type of processing just illustrated is quite powerful in helping visualize
events of interest in complex images, especially when those events are beyond
our normal sensing capabilities. Figure 6.28 is an excellent illustration of this.
These are images of the Jupiter moon Io, shown in pseudocolor by combining
several of the sensor images from the Galileo spacecraft, some of which are in
spectral regions not visible to the eye. However, by understanding the physical
and chemical processes likely to affect sensor response, it is possible to combine
the sensed images into a meaningful pseudocolor map. One way to combine the
sensed image data is by how they show either differences in surface chemical
composition or changes in the way the surface reflects sunlight. For example, in
the pseudocolor image in Fig. 6.28(b), bright red depicts material newly ejected

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.3 ■ Pseudocolor Image Processing

FIGURE 6.27 (a)–(d) Images in bands 1–4 in Fig. 1.10 (see Table 1.1). (e) Color
composite image obtained by treating (a), (b), and (c) as the red, green, blue components of an RGB image. (f) Image obtained in the same manner, but using in the
red channel the near-infrared image in (d). (Original multispectral images courtesy
of NASA.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

a b
c d
e f

423

424

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a
b
FIGURE 6.28

(a) Pseudocolor
rendition of
Jupiter Moon Io.
(b) A close-up.
(Courtesy of
NASA.)

from an active volcano on Io, and the surrounding yellow materials are older
sulfur deposits. This image conveys these characteristics much more readily
than would be possible by analyzing the component images individually.
■

6.4

Basics of Full-Color Image Processing

In this section, we begin the study of processing techniques applicable to fullcolor images. Although they are far from being exhaustive, the techniques developed in the sections that follow are illustrative of how full-color images are
handled for a variety of image processing tasks. Full-color image processing
approaches fall into two major categories. In the first category, we process
each component image individually and then form a composite processed
color image from the individually processed components. In the second category,
we work with color pixels directly. Because full-color images have at least
www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.4 ■ Basics of Full-Color Image Processing

425

three components, color pixels are vectors. For example, in the RGB system,
each color point can be interpreted as a vector extending from the origin to
that point in the RGB coordinate system (see Fig. 6.7).
Let c represent an arbitrary vector in RGB color space:
cR
R
c
c = C GS = CGS
cB
B

(6.4-1)

This equation indicates that the components of c are simply the RGB components of a color image at a point. We take into account the fact that the color
components are a function of coordinates (x, y) by using the notation
cR (x, y)
R(x, y)
c(x, y) = C cG (x, y) S = C G(x, y) S
cB (x, y)
B(x, y)

(6.4-2)

For an image of size M * N, there are MN such vectors, c(x, y), for
x = 0, 1, 2, Á , M - 1; y = 0, 1, 2, Á , N - 1.
It is important to keep in mind that Eq. (6.4-2) depicts a vector whose components are spatial variables in x and y. This is a frequent source of confusion
that can be avoided by focusing on the fact that our interest lies in spatial
processes. That is, we are interested in image processing techniques formulated in x and y. The fact that the pixels are now color pixels introduces a factor
that, in its easiest formulation, allows us to process a color image by processing
each of its component images separately, using standard gray-scale image processing methods. However, the results of individual color component processing are not always equivalent to direct processing in color vector space, in
which case we must formulate new approaches.
In order for per-color-component and vector-based processing to be equivalent, two conditions have to be satisfied: First, the process has to be applicable
to both vectors and scalars. Second, the operation on each component of a vector must be independent of the other components. As an illustration, Fig. 6.29
shows neighborhood spatial processing of gray-scale and full-color images.

a b
FIGURE 6.29

(x, y)
Spatial mask

Gray-scale image

(x, y)
Spatial mask

RGB color image

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Spatial masks for
gray-scale and
RGB color
images.

426

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

Suppose that the process is neighborhood averaging. In Fig. 6.29(a), averaging
would be accomplished by summing the intensities of all the pixels in the
neighborhood and dividing by the total number of pixels in the neighborhood.
In Fig. 6.29(b), averaging would be done by summing all the vectors in the
neighborhood and dividing each component by the total number of vectors in
the neighborhood. But each component of the average vector is the sum of the
pixels in the image corresponding to that component, which is the same as the
result that would be obtained if the averaging were done on a per-colorcomponent basis and then the vector was formed. We show this in more detail
in the following sections. We also show methods in which the results of the two
approaches are not the same.

6.5

Color Transformations

The techniques described in this section, collectively called color transformations, deal with processing the components of a color image within the context
of a single color model, as opposed to the conversion of those components between models (like the RGB-to-HSI and HSI-to-RGB conversion transformations of Section 6.2.3).

6.5.1 Formulation
As with the intensity transformation techniques of Chapter 3, we model color
transformations using the expression
g(x, y) = T[f(x, y)]

(6.5-1)

where f(x, y) is a color input image, g(x, y) is the transformed or processed
color output image, and T is an operator on f over a spatial neighborhood of
(x, y). The principal difference between this equation and Eq. (3.1-1) is in its
interpretation. The pixel values here are triplets or quartets (i.e., groups of
three or four values) from the color space chosen to represent the images, as illustrated in Fig. 6.29(b).
Analogous to the approach we used to introduce the basic intensity transformations in Section 3.2, we will restrict attention in this section to color
transformations of the form
si = Ti (r1, r2, Á , rn),

i = 1, 2, Á , n

(6.5-2)

where, for notational simplicity, ri and si are variables denoting the color components of f(x, y) and g(x, y) at any point (x, y), n is the number of color components, and 5T1, T2, Á , Tn6 is a set of transformation or color mapping
functions that operate on ri to produce si. Note that n transformations, Ti, combine to implement the single transformation function, T, in Eq. (6.5-1). The
color space chosen to describe the pixels of f and g determines the value of n.
If the RGB color space is selected, for example, n = 3 and r1, r2, and r3 denote
the red, green, and blue components of the input image, respectively. If the
CMYK or HSI color spaces are chosen, n = 4 or n = 3.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.5 ■ Color Transformations

427

Full color

Cyan

Magenta

Yellow

Red

Green

Blue

Hue

Saturation

Intensity

Black

FIGURE 6.30 A full-color image and its various color-space components. (Original image courtesy of MedData

Interactive.)

The full-color image in Fig. 6.30 shows a high-resolution color image of a
bowl of strawberries and a cup of coffee that was digitized from a large format
(4– * 5–) color negative. The second row of the figure contains the components

www.EBooksWorld.ir

428

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

of the initial CMYK scan. In these images, black represents 0 and white represents 1 in each CMYK color component. Thus, we see that the strawberries
are composed of large amounts of magenta and yellow because the images
corresponding to these two CMYK components are the brightest. Black is
used sparingly and is generally confined to the coffee and shadows within the
bowl of strawberries. When the CMYK image is converted to RGB, as shown
in the third row of the figure, the strawberries are seen to contain a large
amount of red and very little (although some) green and blue. The last row of
Fig. 6.30 shows the HSI components of the full-color image—computed using
Eqs. (6.2-2) through (6.2-4). As expected, the intensity component is a monochrome rendition of the full-color original. In addition, the strawberries are
relatively pure in color; they possess the highest saturation or least dilution by
white light of any of the hues in the image. Finally, we note some difficulty in
interpreting the hue component. The problem is compounded by the fact
that (1) there is a discontinuity in the HSI model where 0° and 360° meet (see
Fig. 6.15), and (2) hue is undefined for a saturation of 0 (i.e., for white, black,
and pure grays). The discontinuity of the model is most apparent around the
strawberries, which are depicted in gray level values near both black (0) and
white (1). The result is an unexpected mixture of highly contrasting gray levels to represent a single color—red.
Any of the color-space components in Fig. 6.30 can be used in conjunction
with Eq. (6.5-2). In theory, any transformation can be performed in any color
model. In practice, however, some operations are better suited to specific models. For a given transformation, the cost of converting between representations
must be factored into the decision regarding the color space in which to implement it. Suppose, for example, that we wish to modify the intensity of the fullcolor image in Fig. 6.30 using
g(x, y) = kf(x, y)

(6.5-3)

where 0 6 k 6 1. In the HSI color space, this can be done with the simple
transformation
s3 = kr3

(6.5-4)

where s1 = r1 and s2 = r2. Only HSI intensity component r3 is modified. In
the RGB color space, three components must be transformed:
si = kri

i = 1, 2, 3

(6.5-5)

The CMY space requires a similar set of linear transformations:
si = kri + (1 - k)

i = 1, 2, 3

(6.5-6)

Although the HSI transformation involves the fewest number of operations, the computations required to convert an RGB or CMY(K) image to the
HSI space more than offsets (in this case) the advantages of the simpler
transformation—the conversion calculations are more computationally intense than the intensity transformation itself. Regardless of the color space

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.5 ■ Color Transformations

selected, however, the output is the same. Figure 6.31(b) shows the result of
applying any of the transformations in Eqs. (6.5-4) through (6.5-6) to the fullcolor image of Fig. 6.30 using k = 0.7. The mapping functions themselves are
depicted graphically in Figs. 6.31(c) through (e).
It is important to note that each transformation defined in Eqs. (6.5-4)
through (6.5-6) depends only on one component within its color space. For
example, the red output component, s1, in Eq. (6.5-5) is independent of the
green (r2) and blue (r3) inputs; it depends only on the red (r1) input. Transformations of this type are among the simplest and most used color processing tools and can be carried out on a per-color-component basis, as
mentioned at the beginning of our discussion. In the remainder of this section we examine several such transformations and discuss a case in which the
component transformation functions are dependent on all the color components of the input image and, therefore, cannot be done on an individual
color-component basis.

1

1

1

k

k
1k
0

R,G,B
1

0

C,M,Y
1

I
0

H,S
1 0

1

a b
c d e
FIGURE 6.31 Adjusting the intensity of an image using color transformations.

(a) Original image. (b) Result of decreasing its intensity by 30% (i.e., letting k = 0.7).
(c)–(e) The required RGB, CMY, and HSI transformation functions. (Original image
courtesy of MedData Interactive.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

429

430

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

FIGURE 6.32

Magenta

Blue

Complements on
the color circle.

Cyan

ents

plem

Com

Green

Red

Yellow

6.5.2 Color Complements
The hues directly opposite one another on the color circle† of Fig. 6.32 are called
complements. Our interest in complements stems from the fact that they are
analogous to the gray-scale negatives of Section 3.2.1. As in the gray-scale case,
color complements are useful for enhancing detail that is embedded in dark regions of a color image—particularly when the regions are dominant in size.
EXAMPLE 6.7:
Computing color
image
complements.

■ Figures 6.33(a) and (c) show the full-color image from Fig. 6.30 and its color
complement. The RGB transformations used to compute the complement are
plotted in Fig. 6.33(b). They are identical to the gray-scale negative transformation defined in Section 3.2.1. Note that the computed complement is reminiscent of conventional photographic color film negatives. Reds of the original
image are replaced by cyans in the complement. When the original image is
black, the complement is white, and so on. Each of the hues in the complement
image can be predicted from the original image using the color circle of
Fig. 6.32, and each of the RGB component transforms involved in the computation of the complement is a function of only the corresponding input color
component.
Unlike the intensity transformations of Fig. 6.31, the RGB complement
transformation functions used in this example do not have a straightforward
HSI space equivalent. It is left as an exercise for the reader (see Problem 6.18)
to show that the saturation component of the complement cannot be computed from the saturation component of the input image alone. Figure 6.33(d)
provides an approximation of the complement using the hue, saturation, and
intensity transformations given in Fig. 6.33(b). Note that the saturation component of the input image is unaltered; it is responsible for the visual differences between Figs. 6.33(c) and (d).
■
†

The color circle originated with Sir Isaac Newton, who in the seventeenth century joined the ends of the
color spectrum to form the first color circle.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.5 ■ Color Transformations
1

431

a b
c d

1

FIGURE 6.33

R,G,B

H
1

0
1

1

S
0

1

0

I
1

0

1

6.5.3 Color Slicing
Highlighting a specific range of colors in an image is useful for separating objects from their surroundings. The basic idea is either to (1) display the colors
of interest so that they stand out from the background or (2) use the region defined by the colors as a mask for further processing. The most straightforward
approach is to extend the intensity slicing techniques of Section 3.2.4. Because
a color pixel is an n-dimensional quantity, however, the resulting color transformation functions are more complicated than their gray-scale counterparts
in Fig. 3.11. In fact, the required transformations are more complex than the
color component transforms considered thus far. This is because all practical
color-slicing approaches require each pixel’s transformed color components to
be a function of all n original pixel’s color components.
One of the simplest ways to “slice” a color image is to map the colors outside
some range of interest to a nonprominent neutral color. If the colors of interest
are enclosed by a cube (or hypercube for n 7 3) of width W and centered at a

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Color
complement
transformations.
(a) Original
image.
(b) Complement
transformation
functions.
(c) Complement
of (a) based on
the RGB mapping
functions. (d) An
approximation
of the RGB
complement
using HSI
transformations.

432

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

prototypical (e.g., average) color with components (a1, a2, Á , an), the necessary set of transformations is
si = c

0.5

if c ƒ rj - a j ƒ 7

ri

otherwise

W
d
2 any 1 … j … n

i = 1, 2, Á , n

(6.5-7)

These transformations highlight the colors around the prototype by forcing all
other colors to the midpoint of the reference color space (an arbitrarily chosen
neutral point). For the RGB color space, for example, a suitable neutral point
is middle gray or color (0.5, 0.5, 0.5).
If a sphere is used to specify the colors of interest, Eq. (6.5-7) becomes
n

si = c

0.5

if a (rj - a j)2 7 R20

ri

otherwise

j=1

i = 1, 2, Á , n

(6.5-8)

Here, R0 is the radius of the enclosing sphere (or hypersphere for n 7 3) and
(a1, a2, Á , an) are the components of its center (i.e., the prototypical color).
Other useful variations of Eqs. (6.5-7) and (6.5-8) include implementing multiple color prototypes and reducing the intensity of the colors outside the region
of interest—rather than setting them to a neutral constant.
EXAMPLE 6.8:
An illustration of
color slicing.

■ Equations (6.5-7) and (6.5-8) can be used to separate the edible part of the
strawberries in Fig. 6.31(a) from the background cups, bowl, coffee, and table.
Figures 6.34(a) and (b) show the results of applying both transformations. In

a b
FIGURE 6.34 Color-slicing transformations that detect (a) reds within an RGB cube of

width W = 0.2549 centered at (0.6863, 0.1608, 0.1922), and (b) reds within an RGB
sphere of radius 0.1765 centered at the same point. Pixels outside the cube and sphere
were replaced by color (0.5, 0.5, 0.5).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.5 ■ Color Transformations

each case, a prototype red with RGB color coordinate (0.6863, 0.1608, 0.1922)
was selected from the most prominent strawberry; W and R0 were chosen so
that the highlighted region would not expand to undesirable portions of the
image. The actual values, W = 0.2549 and R0 = 0.1765, were determined interactively. Note that the sphere-based transformation of Eq. (6.5-8) is slightly
better, in the sense that it includes more of the strawberries’ red areas. A
sphere of radius 0.1765 does not completely enclose a cube of width 0.2549 but
is itself not completely enclosed by the cube.
■

6.5.4 Tone and Color Corrections
Color transformations can be performed on most desktop computers. In conjunction with digital cameras, flatbed scanners, and inkjet printers, they turn a
personal computer into a digital darkroom—allowing tonal adjustments and
color corrections, the mainstays of high-end color reproduction systems, to be
performed without the need for traditionally outfitted wet processing (i.e.,
darkroom) facilities. Although tone and color corrections are useful in other
areas of imaging, the focus of the current discussion is on the most common
uses—photo enhancement and color reproduction.
The effectiveness of the transformations examined in this section is
judged ultimately in print. Because these transformations are developed, refined, and evaluated on monitors, it is necessary to maintain a high degree of
color consistency between the monitors used and the eventual output devices. In fact, the colors of the monitor should represent accurately any digitally scanned source images, as well as the final printed output. This is best
accomplished with a device-independent color model that relates the color
gamuts (see Section 6.1) of the monitors and output devices, as well as any
other devices being used, to one another. The success of this approach is a
function of the quality of the color profiles used to map each device to the
model and the model itself. The model of choice for many color management
systems (CMS) is the CIE L * a * b* model, also called CIELAB (CIE [1978],
Robertson [1977]). The L * a * b* color components are given by the following equations:

L* = 116 # h ¢

Y
≤ - 16
YW

(6.5-9)

a* = 500 B h ¢

X
Y
≤ - h¢ ≤ R
XW
YW

(6.5-10)

b* = 200 B h ¢

Y
Z
≤ - h¢
≤R
YW
ZW

(6.5-11)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

433

434

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

where
h(q) = b

2
3q
7.787q + 16>116

q 7 0.008856
q … 0.008856

(6.5-12)

and XW, YW, and ZW are reference white tristimulus values—typically the
white of a perfectly reflecting diffuser under CIE standard D65 illumination
(defined by x = 0.3127 and y = 0.3290 in the CIE chromaticity diagram of
Fig. 6.5). The L * a * b* color space is colorimetric (i.e., colors perceived as
matching are encoded identically), perceptually uniform (i.e., color differences
among various hues are perceived uniformly—see the classic paper by
MacAdams [1942]), and device independent. While not a directly displayable
format (conversion to another color space is required), its gamut encompasses
the entire visible spectrum and can represent accurately the colors of any display, print, or input device. Like the HSI system, the L * a * b* system is an excellent decoupler of intensity (represented by lightness L*) and color
(represented by a* for red minus green and b* for green minus blue), making
it useful in both image manipulation (tone and contrast editing) and image
compression applications.†
The principal benefit of calibrated imaging systems is that they allow tonal
and color imbalances to be corrected interactively and independently—that is,
in two sequential operations. Before color irregularities, like over- and undersaturated colors, are resolved, problems involving the image’s tonal range are
corrected. The tonal range of an image, also called its key type, refers to its general distribution of color intensities. Most of the information in high-key images is concentrated at high (or light) intensities; the colors of low-key images
are located predominantly at low intensities; middle-key images lie in between. As in the monochrome case, it is often desirable to distribute the intensities of a color image equally between the highlights and the shadows. The
following examples demonstrate a variety of color transformations for the correction of tonal and color imbalances.
EXAMPLE 6.9:
Tonal
transformations.

■ Transformations for modifying image tones normally are selected interactively. The idea is to adjust experimentally the image’s brightness and contrast to provide maximum detail over a suitable range of intensities. The
colors themselves are not changed. In the RGB and CMY(K) spaces, this
means mapping all three (or four) color components with the same transformation function; in the HSI color space, only the intensity component is
modified.
Figure 6.35 shows typical transformations used for correcting three common tonal imbalances—flat, light, and dark images. The S-shaped curve in the

†

Studies indicate that the degree to which the luminance (lightness) information is separated from the
color information in L * a * b* is greater than in other color models—such as CIELUV, YIQ, YUV,
YCC, and XYZ (Kasson and Plouffe [1992]).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.5 ■ Color Transformations

435

1

R,G,B
Flat

Corrected

0

1

1

R,G,B
Light

Corrected

0

1

1

R,G,B
Dark

Corrected

0

1

FIGURE 6.35 Tonal corrections for flat, light (high key), and dark (low key) color images. Adjusting the red,

green, and blue components equally does not always alter the image hues significantly.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

436

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

first row of the figure is ideal for boosting contrast [see Fig. 3.2(a)]. Its midpoint is anchored so that highlight and shadow areas can be lightened and
darkened, respectively. (The inverse of this curve can be used to correct excessive contrast.) The transformations in the second and third rows of the figure correct light and dark images and are reminiscent of the power-law
transformations in Fig. 3.6. Although the color components are discrete, as
are the actual transformation functions, the transformation functions themselves are displayed and manipulated as continuous quantities—typically
constructed from piecewise linear or higher order (for smoother mappings)
polynomials. Note that the keys of the images in Fig. 6.35 are directly observable; they could also be determined using the histograms of the images’ color
components.
■

EXAMPLE 6.10:
Color balancing.

■ After the tonal characteristics of an image have been properly established,
any color imbalances can be addressed. Although color imbalances can be determined objectively by analyzing—with a color spectrometer—a known
color in an image, accurate visual assessments are possible when white areas,
where the RGB or CMY(K) components should be equal, are present. As can
be seen in Fig. 6.36, skin tones also are excellent subjects for visual color assessments because humans are highly perceptive of proper skin color. Vivid
colors, such as bright red objects, are of little value when it comes to visual
color assessment.
When a color imbalance is noted, there are a variety of ways to correct
it. When adjusting the color components of an image, it is important to realize that every action affects the overall color balance of the image. That
is, the perception of one color is affected by its surrounding colors. Nevertheless, the color wheel of Fig. 6.32 can be used to predict how one color
component will affect others. Based on the color wheel, for example, the
proportion of any color can be increased by decreasing the amount of the
opposite (or complementary) color in the image. Similarly, it can be increased by raising the proportion of the two immediately adjacent colors
or decreasing the percentage of the two colors adjacent to the complement. Suppose, for instance, that there is an abundance of magenta in an
RGB image. It can be decreased by (1) removing both red and blue or (2) adding
green.
Figure 6.36 shows the transformations used to correct simple CMYK output imbalances. Note that the transformations depicted are the functions required for correcting the images; the inverses of these functions were used
to generate the associated color imbalances. Together, the images are analogous to a color ring-around print of a darkroom environment and are useful
as a reference tool for identifying color printing problems. Note, for example, that too much red can be due to excessive magenta (per the bottom left
image) or too little cyan (as shown in the rightmost image of the second
■
row).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.5 ■ Color Transformations

437

Original/Corrected

1

Heavy in
black

1

B

1

Heavy in
magenta

1

0

1

Weak in
magenta

1

Heavy in
yellow

0

FIGURE 6.36 Color balancing corrections for CMYK color images.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

1

0

1

Y
1

Weak in
cyan

C
1

0

M
1

Heavy in
cyan

C
1

0

M
0

1

B
1

0

Weak in
black

Weak in
yellow

Y
1

0

1

438

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

6.5.5 Histogram Processing
Unlike the interactive enhancement approaches of the previous section, the
gray-level histogram processing transformations of Section 3.3 can be applied
to color images in an automated way. Recall that histogram equalization automatically determines a transformation that seeks to produce an image with a
uniform histogram of intensity values. In the case of monochrome images, it
was shown (see Fig. 3.20) to be reasonably successful at handling low-, high-,
and middle-key images. Since color images are composed of multiple components, however, consideration must be given to adapting the gray-scale technique to more than one component and/or histogram. As might be expected, it
is generally unwise to histogram equalize the components of a color image independently. This results in erroneous color. A more logical approach is to
spread the color intensities uniformly, leaving the colors themselves (e.g.,
hues) unchanged. The following example shows that the HSI color space is
ideally suited to this type of approach.

a b
c d

1

1

FIGURE 6.37

Histogram
equalization
(followed by
saturation
adjustment) in the
HSI color space.

H

S
1

0

0

1

Histogram before processing
(median  0.36)

1
0.5

Histogram after processing
(median  0.5)

I
0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

0.36

1

6.6 ■ Smoothing and Sharpening

■ Figure 6.37(a) shows a color image of a caster stand containing cruets and
shakers whose intensity component spans the entire (normalized) range of
possible values, [0, 1]. As can be seen in the histogram of its intensity component prior to processing [Fig. 6.37(b)], the image contains a large number of
dark colors that reduce the median intensity to 0.36. Histogram equalizing the
intensity component, without altering the hue and saturation, resulted in the
image shown in Fig. 6.37(c). Note that the overall image is significantly
brighter and that several moldings and the grain of the wooden table on which
the caster is sitting are now visible. Figure 6.37(b) shows the intensity histogram of the new image, as well as the intensity transformation used to equalize the intensity component [see Eq. (3.3-8)].
Although the intensity equalization process did not alter the values of hue
and saturation of the image, it did impact the overall color perception. Note, in
particular, the loss of vibrancy in the oil and vinegar in the cruets. Figure
6.37(d) shows the result of correcting this partially by increasing the image’s
saturation component, subsequent to histogram equalization, using the transformation in Fig. 6.37(b). This type of adjustment is common when working
with the intensity component in HSI space because changes in intensity usually affect the relative appearance of colors in an image.
■

6.6

Smoothing and Sharpening

The next step beyond transforming each pixel of a color image without regard
to its neighbors (as in the previous section) is to modify its value based on the
characteristics of the surrounding pixels. In this section, the basics of this type
of neighborhood processing are illustrated within the context of color image
smoothing and sharpening.

6.6.1 Color Image Smoothing
With reference to Fig. 6.29(a) and the discussion in Sections 3.4 and 3.5, grayscale image smoothing can be viewed as a spatial filtering operation in which
the coefficients of the filtering mask have the same value. As the mask is slid
across the image to be smoothed, each pixel is replaced by the average of the
pixels in the neighborhood defined by the mask. As can be seen in Fig. 6.29(b),
this concept is easily extended to the processing of full-color images. The principal difference is that instead of scalar intensity values we must deal with
component vectors of the form given in Eq. (6.4-2).
Let Sxy denote the set of coordinates defining a neighborhood centered at
(x, y) in an RGB color image. The average of the RGB component vectors in
this neighborhood is
c (x, y) =

1
a c(s, t)
K (s, t)HS
xy

www.EBooksWorld.ir

(6.6-1)

439

EXAMPLE 6.11:
Histogram
equalization in the
HSI color space.

440

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

It follows from Eq. (6.4-2) and the properties of vector addition that

Consult the book Web site
for a brief review of vectors and matrices.

1
R(s, t)
K (s, a
t)HSxy
1
c (x, y) = FK a G(s, t)V
(s, t)HSxy
1
B(s, t)
K (s, a
t)HSxy

(6.6-2)

We recognize the components of this vector as the scalar images that would be
obtained by independently smoothing each plane of the starting RGB image
using conventional gray-scale neighborhood processing. Thus, we conclude
that smoothing by neighborhood averaging can be carried out on a per-colorplane basis. The result is the same as when the averaging is performed using
RGB color vectors.

EXAMPLE 6.12:
Color image
smoothing by
neighborhood
averaging.

■ Consider the RGB color image in Fig. 6.38(a). Its red, green, and blue component images are shown in Figs. 6.38(b) through (d). Figures 6.39(a) through
(c) show the HSI components of the image. Based on the discussion in the previous paragraph, we smoothed each component image of the RGB image in
Fig. 6.38 independently using a 5 * 5 spatial averaging mask. We then combined the individually smoothed images to form the smoothed, full-color RGB
result shown in Fig. 6.40(a). Note that this image appears as we would expect
from performing a spatial smoothing operation, as in the examples given in
Section 3.5.
In Section 6.2, we noted that an important advantage of the HSI color
model is that it decouples intensity and color information. This makes it
suitable for many gray-scale processing techniques and suggests that it
might be more efficient to smooth only the intensity component of the HSI
representation in Fig. 6.39. To illustrate the merits and/or consequences of
this approach, we next smooth only the intensity component (leaving the
hue and saturation components unmodified) and convert the processed result to an RGB image for display. The smoothed color image is shown in
Fig. 6.40(b). Note that it is similar to Fig. 6.40(a), but, as you can see from
the difference image in Fig. 6.40(c), the two smoothed images are not identical. This is because in Fig. 6.40(a) the color of each pixel is the average
color of the pixels in the neighborhood. On the other hand, by smoothing
only the intensity component image in Fig. 6.40(b), the hue and saturation
of each pixel was not affected and, therefore, the pixel colors did not
change. It follows from this observation that the difference between the
two smoothing approaches would become more pronounced as a function
of increasing filter size.
■

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.6 ■ Smoothing and Sharpening

441

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.38

(a) RGB image.
(b) Red
component image.
(c) Green component. (d) Blue
component.

a b c
FIGURE 6.39 HSI components of the RGB color image in Fig. 6.38(a). (a) Hue. (b) Saturation. (c) Intensity.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

442

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a b c
FIGURE 6.40 Image smoothing with a 5 * 5 averaging mask. (a) Result of processing each RGB
component image. (b) Result of processing the intensity component of the HSI image and converting to
RGB. (c) Difference between the two results.

6.6.2 Color Image Sharpening
In this section we consider image sharpening using the Laplacian (see Section
3.6.2). From vector analysis, we know that the Laplacian of a vector is defined
as a vector whose components are equal to the Laplacian of the individual
scalar components of the input vector. In the RGB color system, the Laplacian
of vector c in Eq. (6.4-2) is
§2R(x, y)
§2[c(x, y)] = C §2G(x, y) S
§2B(x, y)

(6.6-3)

which, as in the previous section, tells us that we can compute the Laplacian of a
full-color image by computing the Laplacian of each component image separately.

a b c
FIGURE 6.41 Image sharpening with the Laplacian. (a) Result of processing each RGB channel. (b) Result of

processing the HSI intensity component and converting to RGB. (c) Difference between the two results.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.7 ■ Image Segmentation Based on Color

■ Figure 6.41(a) was obtained using Eq. (3.6-7) and the mask in Fig. 3.37(c) to
compute the Laplacians of the RGB component images in Fig. 6.38. These results were combined to produce the sharpened full-color result. Figure 6.41(b)
shows a similarly sharpened image based on the HSI components in Fig. 6.39.
This result was generated by combining the Laplacian of the intensity component with the unchanged hue and saturation components. The difference between the RGB and HSI sharpened images is shown in Fig. 6.41(c). The reason
for the discrepancies between the two images is as in Example 6.12.
■

6.7

443

EXAMPLE 6.13:
Sharpening with
the Laplacian.

Image Segmentation Based on Color

Segmentation is a process that partitions an image into regions. Although
segmentation is the topic of Chapter 10, we consider color segmentation
briefly here for the sake of continuity. You will have no difficulty following
the discussion.

6.7.1 Segmentation in HSI Color Space
If we wish to segment an image based on color, and, in addition, we want to
carry out the process on individual planes, it is natural to think first of the HSI
space because color is conveniently represented in the hue image. Typically,
saturation is used as a masking image in order to isolate further regions of interest in the hue image. The intensity image is used less frequently for segmentation of color images because it carries no color information. The following
example is typical of how segmentation is performed in the HSI color space.

■ Suppose that it is of interest to segment the reddish region in the lower left
of the image in Fig. 6.42(a). Although it was generated by pseudocolor methods, this image can be processed (segmented) as a full-color image without loss
of generality. Figures 6.42(b) through (d) are its HSI component images. Note
by comparing Figs. 6.42(a) and (b) that the region in which we are interested
has relatively high values of hue, indicating that the colors are on the bluemagenta side of red (see Fig. 6.13). Figure 6.42(e) shows a binary mask generated by thresholding the saturation image with a threshold equal to 10% of the
maximum value in that image. Any pixel value greater than the threshold was
set to 1 (white). All others were set to 0 (black).
Figure 6.42(f) is the product of the mask with the hue image, and Fig.
6.42(g) is the histogram of the product image (note that the gray scale is in the
range [0, 1]). We see in the histogram that high values (which are the values of
interest) are grouped at the very high end of the gray scale, near 1.0. The result
of thresholding the product image with threshold value of 0.9 resulted in the
binary image shown in Fig. 6.42(h). The spatial location of the white points in
this image identifies the points in the original image that have the reddish hue
of interest. This was far from a perfect segmentation because there are points
in the original image that we certainly would say have a reddish hue, but that
were not identified by this segmentation method. However, it can be determined
www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 6.14:
Segmentation in
HSI space.

444

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a b
c d
e f
g h

FIGURE 6.42 Image segmentation in HSI space. (a) Original. (b) Hue. (c) Saturation.

(d) Intensity. (e) Binary saturation mask (black = 0). (f) Product of (b) and (e).
(g) Histogram of (f). (h) Segmentation of red components in (a).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.7 ■ Image Segmentation Based on Color

445

by experimentation that the regions shown in white in Fig. 6.42(h) are about
the best this method can do in identifying the reddish components of the original image. The segmentation method discussed in the following section is capable of yielding considerably better results.
■

6.7.2 Segmentation in RGB Vector Space
Although, as mentioned numerous times in this chapter, working in HSI space
is more intuitive, segmentation is one area in which better results generally are
obtained by using RGB color vectors. The approach is straightforward. Suppose that the objective is to segment objects of a specified color range in an
RGB image. Given a set of sample color points representative of the colors of
interest, we obtain an estimate of the “average” color that we wish to segment.
Let this average color be denoted by the RGB vector a. The objective of segmentation is to classify each RGB pixel in a given image as having a color in
the specified range or not. In order to perform this comparison, it is necessary
to have a measure of similarity. One of the simplest measures is the Euclidean
distance. Let z denote an arbitrary point in RGB space. We say that z is similar
to a if the distance between them is less than a specified threshold, D0. The Euclidean distance between z and a is given by
D(z, a) = 7z - a7
1

= [(z - a)T(z - a)]2

(6.7-1)
1
2

= [(zR - a R)2 + (zG - a G)2 + (zB - a B)2 ]

where the subscripts R, G, and B denote the RGB components of vectors a and
z. The locus of points such that D(z, a) … D0 is a solid sphere of radius D0, as illustrated in Fig. 6.43(a). Points contained within the sphere satisfy the specified
color criterion; points outside the sphere do not. Coding these two sets of points
in the image with, say, black and white, produces a binary segmented image.
A useful generalization of Eq. (6.7-1) is a distance measure of the form
1

D(z, a) = [(z - a)TC-1(z - a)]2

B

(6.7-2)

B

B

a b c
FIGURE 6.43

G

R

R

G

R

www.EBooksWorld.ir

G

Three approaches
for enclosing data
regions for RGB
vector
segmentation.

446

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

where C is the covariance matrix† of the samples representative of the color
we wish to segment. The locus of points such that D(z, a) … D0 describes a
solid 3-D elliptical body [Fig. 6.43(b)] with the important property that its
principal axes are oriented in the direction of maximum data spread. When
C = I, the 3 * 3 identity matrix, Eq. (6.7-2) reduces to Eq. (6.7-1). Segmentation is as described in the preceding paragraph.
Because distances are positive and monotonic, we can work with the distance squared instead, thus avoiding square root computations. However,
implementing Eq. (6.7-1) or (6.7-2) is computationally expensive for images
of practical size, even if the square roots are not computed. A compromise is
to use a bounding box, as illustrated in Fig. 6.43(c). In this approach, the box
is centered on a, and its dimensions along each of the color axes is chosen
proportional to the standard deviation of the samples along each of the axis.
Computation of the standard deviations is done only once using sample
color data.
Given an arbitrary color point, we segment it by determining whether or
not it is on the surface or inside the box, as with the distance formulations.
However, determining whether a color point is inside or outside a box is much
simpler computationally when compared to a spherical or elliptical enclosure.
Note that the preceding discussion is a generalization of the method introduced in Section 6.5.3 in connection with color slicing.

EXAMPLE 6.15:
Color image
segmentation in
RGB space.

■ The rectangular region shown Fig. 6.44(a) contains samples of reddish colors we wish to segment out of the color image. This is the same problem we
considered in Example 6.14 using hue, but here we approach the problem
using RGB color vectors. The approach followed was to compute the mean
vector a using the color points contained within the rectangle in Fig. 6.44(a),
and then to compute the standard deviation of the red, green, and blue values
of those samples. A box was centered at a, and its dimensions along each of the
RGB axes were selected as 1.25 times the standard deviation of the data along
the corresponding axis. For example, let sR denote the standard deviation of
the red components of the sample points. Then the dimensions of the box
along the R-axis extended from (aR - 1.25sR) to (aR + 1.25sR), where aR denotes the red component of average vector a. The result of coding each point
in the entire color image as white if it was on the surface or inside the box, and
as black otherwise, is shown in Fig. 6.44(b). Note how the segmented region
was generalized from the color samples enclosed by the rectangle. In fact, by
comparing Figs. 6.44(b) and. 6.42(h), we see that segmentation in the RGB
vector space yielded results that are much more accurate, in the sense that
they correspond much more closely with what we would define as “reddish”
points in the original color image.
■

†

Computation of the covariance matrix of a set of vector samples is discussed in Section 11.4.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.7 ■ Image Segmentation Based on Color

447

a
b
FIGURE 6.44

Segmentation in
RGB space.
(a) Original image
with colors of
interest shown
enclosed by a
rectangle.
(b) Result of
segmentation in
RGB vector
space. Compare
with Fig. 6.42(h).

6.7.3 Color Edge Detection
As discussed in Chapter 10, edge detection is an important tool for image segmentation. In this section, we are interested in the issue of computing edges on
an individual-image basis versus computing edges directly in color vector
space. The details of edge-based segmentation are given in Section 10.2.
Edge detection by gradient operators was introduced in Section 3.6.4 in
connection with image sharpening. Unfortunately, the gradient discussed in
Section 3.6.4 is not defined for vector quantities. Thus, we know immediately
that computing the gradient on individual images and then using the results to
form a color image will lead to erroneous results. A simple example will help
illustrate the reason why.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

448

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

Consider the two M * M color images (M odd) in Figs. 6.45(d) and (h),
composed of the three component images in Figs. 6.45(a) through (c) and (e)
through (g), respectively. If, for example, we compute the gradient image of
each of the component images [see Eq. (3.6-11)] and add the results to form
the two corresponding RGB gradient images, the value of the gradient at point
[(M + 1)>2, (M + 1)>2] would be the same in both cases. Intuitively, we
would expect the gradient at that point to be stronger for the image in Fig.
6.45(d) because the edges of the R, G, and B images are in the same direction
in that image, as opposed to the image in Fig. 6.45(h), in which only two of the
edges are in the same direction. Thus we see from this simple example that
processing the three individual planes to form a composite gradient image can
yield erroneous results. If the problem is one of just detecting edges, then the
individual-component approach usually yields acceptable results. If accuracy
is an issue, however, then obviously we need a new definition of the gradient applicable to vector quantities. We discuss next a method proposed by
Di Zenzo [1986] for doing this.
The problem at hand is to define the gradient (magnitude and direction) of
the vector c in Eq. (6.4-2) at any point (x, y). As was just mentioned, the gradient we studied in Section 3.6.4 is applicable to a scalar function f(x, y); it is not
applicable to vector functions. The following is one of the various ways in
which we can extend the concept of a gradient to vector functions. Recall that
for a scalar function f(x, y), the gradient is a vector pointing in the direction of
maximum rate of change of f at coordinates (x, y).

a b c d
e f g h
FIGURE 6.45 (a)–(c) R, G, and B component images and (d) resulting RGB color image. (e)–(g) R, G, and B

component images and (h) resulting RGB color image.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.7 ■ Image Segmentation Based on Color

Let r, g, and b be unit vectors along the R, G, and B axis of RGB color space
(Fig. 6.7), and define the vectors
u =

0R
0G
0B
r +
g +
b
0x
0x
0x

(6.7-3)

v =

0R
0G
0B
r +
g +
b
0y
0y
0y

(6.7-4)

and

Let the quantities gxx, gyy, and gxy be defined in terms of the dot product of
these vectors, as follows:
gxx = u # u = uTu = `

0R 2
0G 2
0B 2
` + ` ` + ` `
0x
0x
0x

(6.7-5)

gyy = v # v = vTv = `

0R 2
0G 2
0B 2
` + ` ` + ` `
0y
0y
0y

(6.7-6)

0R 0R
0G 0G
0B 0B
+
+
0x 0y
0x 0y
0x 0y

(6.7-7)

and
gxy = u # v = uTv =

Keep in mind that R, G, and B, and consequently the g’s, are functions of x and
y. Using this notation, it can be shown (Di Zenzo [1986]) that the direction of
maximum rate of change of c(x, y) is given by the angle
u(x, y) =

2gxy
1
tan-1 B
R
gxx - gyy
2

(6.7-8)

and that the value of the rate of change at (x, y), in the direction of u(x, y), is
given by
Fu (x, y) = e

1

2
1
C (g + gyy) + (gxx - gyy) cos 2u(x, y) + 2gxy sin 2u(x, y) D f
2 xx

(6.7-9)

Because tan(a) = tan(a ; p), if u0 is a solution to Eq. (6.7-8), so is u0 ; p>2.
Furthermore, Fu = Fu + p, so F has to be computed only for values of u in the
half-open interval [0, p). The fact that Eq. (6.7-8) provides two values 90°
apart means that this equation associates with each point (x, y) a pair of orthogonal directions. Along one of those directions F is maximum, and it is
minimum along the other. The derivation of these results is rather lengthy,
and we would gain little in terms of the fundamental objective of our current
discussion by detailing it here. Consult the paper by Di Zenzo [1986] for
details. The partial derivatives required for implementing Eqs. (6.7-5)
through (6.7-7) can be computed using, for example, the Sobel operators discussed in Section 3.6.4.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

449

450

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

EXAMPLE 6.16:
Edge detection in
vector space.

■ Figure 6.46(b) is the gradient of the image in Fig. 6.46(a), obtained using
the vector method just discussed. Figure 6.46(c) shows the image obtained by
computing the gradient of each RGB component image and forming a composite gradient image by adding the corresponding values of the three component images at each coordinate (x, y). The edge detail of the vector
gradient image is more complete than the detail in the individual-plane gradient image in Fig. 6.46(c); for example, see the detail around the subject’s right
eye. The image in Fig. 6.46(d) shows the difference between the two gradient
images at each point (x, y). It is important to note that both approaches yielded reasonable results. Whether the extra detail in Fig. 6.46(b) is worth the
added computational burden (as opposed to implementation of the Sobel operators, which were used to generate the gradient of the individual planes)
can only be determined by the requirements of a given problem. Figure 6.47
shows the three component gradient images, which, when added and scaled,
were used to obtain Fig. 6.46(c).
■

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.46

(a) RGB image.
(b) Gradient
computed in RGB
color vector
space.
(c) Gradients
computed on a
per-image basis
and then added.
(d) Difference
between (b)
and (c).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.8 ■ Noise in Color Images

451

a b c
FIGURE 6.47 Component gradient images of the color image in Fig. 6.46. (a) Red component, (b) green

component, and (c) blue component. These three images were added and scaled to produce the image in
Fig. 6.46(c).

6.8

Noise in Color Images

The noise models discussed in Section 5.2 are applicable to color images. Usually, the noise content of a color image has the same characteristics in each
color channel, but it is possible for color channels to be affected differently by
noise. One possibility is for the electronics of a particular channel to malfunction. However, different noise levels are more likely to be caused by differences
in the relative strength of illumination available to each of the color channels.
For example, use of a red (reject) filter in a CCD camera will reduce the
strength of illumination available to the red sensor. CCD sensors are noisier at
lower levels of illumination, so the resulting red component of an RGB image
would tend to be noisier than the other two component images in this situation.

■ In this example we take a brief look at noise in color images and how noise
carries over when converting from one color model to another. Figures 6.48(a)
through (c) show the three color planes of an RGB image corrupted by Gaussian noise, and Fig. 6.48(d) is the composite RGB image. Note that fine grain
noise such as this tends to be less visually noticeable in a color image than it is
in a monochrome image. Figures 6.49(a) through (c) show the result of converting the RGB image in Fig. 6.48(d) to HSI. Compare these results with the
HSI components of the original image (Fig. 6.39) and note how significantly
degraded the hue and saturation components of the noisy image are. This is
due to the nonlinearity of the cos and min operations in Eqs. (6.2-2) and (6.2-3),
respectively. On the other hand, the intensity component in Fig. 6.49(c) is
slightly smoother than any of the three noisy RGB component images. This is
due to the fact that the intensity image is the average of the RGB images, as indicated in Eq. (6.2-4). (Recall the discussion in Section 2.6.3 regarding the fact
that image averaging reduces random noise.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 6.17:
Illustration of the
effects of
converting noisy
RGB images to
HSI.

452

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.48

(a)–(c) Red,
green, and blue
component
images corrupted
by additive
Gaussian noise of
mean 0 and
variance 800.
(d) Resulting
RGB image.
[Compare (d)
with Fig. 6.46(a).]

a b c
FIGURE 6.49 HSI components of the noisy color image in Fig. 6.48(d). (a) Hue. (b) Saturation. (c) Intensity.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

6.8 ■ Noise in Color Images

a b
c d
FIGURE 6.50 (a) RGB image with green plane corrupted by salt-and-pepper noise.

(b) Hue component of HSI image. (c) Saturation component. (d) Intensity
component.

In cases when, say, only one RGB channel is affected by noise, conversion
to HSI spreads the noise to all HSI component images. Figure 6.50 shows an
example. Figure 6.50(a) shows an RGB image whose green image is corrupted
by salt-and-pepper noise, in which the probability of either salt or pepper is
0.05. The HSI component images in Figs. 6.50(b) through (d) show clearly how
the noise spread from the green RGB channel to all the HSI images. Of
course, this is not unexpected because computation of the HSI components
makes use of all RGB components, as shown in Section 6.2.3.
■
As is true of the processes we have discussed thus far, filtering of fullcolor images can be carried out on a per-image basis or directly in color vector

www.EBooksWorld.ir

453

454

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

space, depending on the process. For example, noise reduction by using an
averaging filter is the process discussed in Section 6.6.1, which we know
gives the same result in vector space as it does if the component images are
processed independently. Other filters, however, cannot be formulated in
this manner. Examples include the class of order statistics filters discussed
in Section 5.3.2. For instance, to implement a median filter in color vector
space it is necessary to find a scheme for ordering vectors in a way that the
median makes sense. While this was a simple process when dealing with
scalars, the process is considerably more complex when dealing with vectors. A discussion of vector ordering is beyond the scope of our discussion
here, but the book by Plataniotis and Venetsanopoulos [2000] is a good reference on vector ordering and some of the filters based on the ordering
concept.

6.9

Color Image Compression

Because the number of bits required to represent color is typically three to
four times greater than the number employed in the representation of gray
levels, data compression plays a central role in the storage and transmission
of color images. With respect to the RGB, CMY(K), and HSI images of the
previous sections, the data that are the object of any compression are the
components of each color pixel (e.g., the red, green, and blue components of
the pixels in an RGB image); they are the means by which the color information is conveyed. Compression is the process of reducing or eliminating
redundant and/or irrelevant data. Although compression is the topic of
Chapter 8, we illustrate the concept briefly in the following example using a
color image.

EXAMPLE 6.18:
A color image
compression
example.

■ Figure 6.51(a) shows a 24-bit RGB full-color image of an iris in which 8 bits
each are used to represent the red, green, and blue components. Figure 6.51(b)
was reconstructed from a compressed version of the image in (a) and is, in fact,
a compressed and subsequently decompressed approximation of it. Although
the compressed image is not directly displayable—it must be decompressed
before input to a color monitor—the compressed image contains only 1 data
bit (and thus 1 storage bit) for every 230 bits of data in the original image. Assuming that the compressed image could be transmitted over, say, the Internet,
in 1 minute, transmission of the original image would require almost 4 hours.
Of course, the transmitted data would have to be decompressed for viewing,
but the decompression can be done in a matter of seconds. The JPEG 2000
compression algorithm used to generate Fig. 6.51(b) is a recently introduced
standard that is described in detail in Section 8.2.10. Note that the reconstructed approximation image is slightly blurred. This is a characteristic of many
lossy compression techniques; it can be reduced or eliminated by altering the
level of compression.
■

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Summary

455

a
b
FIGURE 6.51

Color image
compression.
(a) Original RGB
image. (b) Result
of compressing
and decompressing the
image in (a).

Summary
The material in this chapter is an introduction to color image processing and covers topics
selected to provide a solid background in the techniques used in this branch of image processing. Our treatment of color fundamentals and color models was prepared as foundation
material for a field that is wide in technical scope and areas of application. In particular, we
focused on color models that we felt are not only useful in digital image processing but provide also the tools necessary for further study in this area of image processing. The discussion of pseudocolor and full-color processing on an individual image basis provides a tie to
techniques that were covered in some detail in Chapters 3 through 5.
The material on color vector spaces is a departure from methods that we had studied before and highlights some important differences between gray-scale and full-color
processing. In terms of techniques, the areas of direct color vector processing are
numerous and include processes such as median and other order filters, adaptive and

www.EBooksWorld.ir

456

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing
morphological filters, image restoration, image compression, and many others. These
processes are not equivalent to color processing carried out on the individual component images of a color image. The references in the following section provide a pointer
to further results in this field.
Our treatment of noise in color images also points out that the vector nature of the
problem, along with the fact that color images are routinely transformed from one
working space to another, has implications on the issue of how to reduce noise in these
images. In some cases, noise filtering can be done on a per-image basis, but others, such
as median filtering, require special treatment to reflect the fact that color pixels are
vector quantities, as mentioned in the previous paragraph.
Although segmentation is the topic of Chapter 10 and image data compression is
the topic of Chapter 8, we gained the advantage of continuity by introducing them here
in the context of color image processing. As will become evident in subsequent discussions, many of the techniques developed in those chapters are applicable to the discussion in this chapter.

References and Further Reading
For a comprehensive reference on the science of color, see Malacara [2001]. Regarding
the physiology of color, see Gegenfurtner and Sharpe [1999]. These two references,
along with the early books by Walsh [1958] and by Kiver [1965], provide ample supplementary material for the discussion in Section 6.1. For further reading on color models
(Section 6.2), see Fortner and Meyer [1997], Poynton [1996], and Fairchild [1998]. For a
detailed derivation of the HSI model equations in Section 6.2.3 see the paper by Smith
[1978] or consult the book Web site. The topic of pseudocolor (Section 6.3) is closely
tied to the general area of data visualization. Wolff and Yaeger [1993] is a good basic
reference on the use of pseudocolor. The book by Thorell and Smith [1990] also is of interest. For a discussion on the vector representation of color signals (Section 6.4), see
Plataniotis and Venetsanopoulos [2000].
References for Section 6.5 are Benson [1985], Robertson [1977], and CIE [1978]. See
also the classic paper by MacAdam [1942]. The material on color image filtering
(Section 6.6) is based on the vector formulation introduced in Section 6.4 and on our
discussion of spatial filtering in Chapter 3. Segmentation of color images (Section 6.7)
has been a topic of much attention during the past ten years.The papers by Liu and Yang
[1994] and by Shafarenko et al. [1998] are representative of work in this field. A special
issue of the IEEE Transactions on Image Processing [1997] also is of interest. The discussion on color edge detection (Section 6.7.3) is from Di Zenzo [1986]. The book by
Plataniotis and Venetsanopoulos [2000] does a good job of summarizing a variety of approaches to the segmentation of color images. The discussion in Section 6.8 is based on
the noise models introduced in Section 5.2. References on image compression (Section
6.9) are listed at the end of Chapter 8. For details of software implementation of many of
the techniques discussed in this chapter, see Gonzalez, Woods, and Eddins [2004].

Problems
6.1

Detailed solutions to the
problems marked with a
star can be found in the
 6.2
book Web site. The site
also contains suggested
projects based on the material in this chapter.

Give the percentages of red (X), green (Y), and blue (Z) light required to generate the point labeled “warm white” in Fig. 6.5.
Consider any two valid colors c1 and c2 with coordinates (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) in
the chromaticity diagram of Fig. 6.5. Derive the necessary general expression(s)
for computing the relative percentages of colors c1 and c2 composing a given
color that is known to lie on the straight line joining these two colors.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

6.3

Consider any three valid colors c1, c2, and c3 with coordinates (x1, y1), (x2, y2),
and (x3, y3) in the chromaticity diagram of Fig. 6.5. Derive the necessary general expression(s) for computing the relative percentages of c1, c2, and c3 composing a given color that is known to lie within the triangle whose vertices are at the
coordinates of c1, c2, and c3.

 6.4

In an automated assembly application, three classes of parts are to be color
coded in order to simplify detection. However, only a monochrome TV camera
is available to acquire digital images. Propose a technique for using this camera
to detect the three different colors.

6.5

In a simple RGB image, the R, G, and B component images have the horizontal
intensity profiles shown in the following diagram. What color would a person
see in the middle column of this image?

0

N/2
Position

Green

0.5

N1

0

N/2
Position

N1

Color

Red

0.5

1.0

Color

1.0

Color

1.0

Blue

0.5

0

 6.6

Sketch the RGB components of the following image as they would appear on a
monochrome monitor. All colors are at maximum intensity and saturation. In
working this problem, consider the middle gray border as part of the image.

6.7

How many different shades of gray are there in a color RGB system in which
each RGB image is an 8-bit image?

6.8

457

Consider the RGB color cube shown in Fig 6.8, and answer each of the following:
(a) Describe how the gray levels vary in the R, G, and B primary images that
make up the front face of the color cube.
(b) Suppose that we replace every color in the RGB cube by its CMY color.
This new cube is displayed on an RGB monitor. Label with a color name the
eight vertices of the new cube that you would see on the screen.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

N/ 2
Position

N1

458

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing

6.9

 6.10
6.11

 6.12
6.13

 6.14

6.15

(c) What can you say about the colors on the edges of the RGB color cube regarding saturation?
(a) Sketch the CMY components of the image in Problem 6.6 as they would appear on a monochrome monitor.
(b) If the CMY components sketched in (a) are fed into the red, green, and blue
inputs of a color monitor, respectively, describe the resulting image.
Derive the CMY intensity mapping function of Eq. (6.5-6) from its RGB counterpart in Eq. (6.5-5).
Consider the entire 216 safe-color array shown in Fig. 6.10(a). Label each cell by
its (row, column) designation, so that the top left cell is (1, 1) and the rightmost
bottom cell is (12, 18). At which cells will you find
(a) The purest green?
(b) The purest blue?
Sketch the HSI components of the image in Problem 6.6 as they would appear
on a monochrome monitor.
Propose a method for generating a color band similar to the one shown in the
zoomed section entitled Visible Spectrum in Fig. 6.2. Note that the band starts at
a dark purple on the left and proceeds toward pure red on the right. (Hint: Use
the HSI color model.)
Propose a method for generating a color version of the image shown diagrammatically in Fig. 6.13(c). Give your answer in the form of a flow chart. Assume
that the intensity value is fixed and given. (Hint: Use the HSI color model.)
Consider the following image composed of solid color squares. For discussing
your answer, choose a gray scale consisting of eight shades of gray, 0 through 7,
where 0 is black and 7 is white. Suppose that the image is converted to HSI color
space. In answering the following questions, use specific numbers for the gray
shades if using numbers makes sense. Otherwise, the relationships “same as,”
“lighter than,” or “darker than” are sufficient. If you cannot assign a specific gray
level or one of these relationships to the image you are discussing, give the reason.
(a) Sketch the hue image.
(b) Sketch the saturation image.
(c) Sketch the intensity image.

Red

Green

Blue

Magenta

Cyan

Yellow

White
Black

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

6.16

The following 8-bit images are (left to right) the H, S, and I component images from Fig. 6.16. The numbers indicate gray-level values. Answer the following questions, explaining the basis for your answer in each. If it is not
possible to answer a question based on the given information, state why you
cannot do so.
(a) Give the gray-level values of all regions in the hue image.
(b) Give the gray-level value of all regions in the saturation image.
(c) Give the gray-level values of all regions in the intensity image.

(a)

6.17

 6.18
6.19
 6.20
6.21
 6.22

6.23

(b)

Refer to Fig. 6.27 in answering the following:
(a) Why does the image in Fig. 6.27(f) exhibit predominantly red tones?
(b) Suggest an automated procedure for coding the water in Fig. 6.27 in a
bright-blue color.
(c) Suggest an automated procedure for coding the predominantly man-made
components in a bright yellow color. [Hint: Work with Fig. 6.27(f).]
Show that the saturation component of the complement of a color image cannot
be computed from the saturation component of the input image alone.
Explain the shape of the hue transformation function for the complement approximation in Fig. 6.33(b) using the HSI color model.
Derive the CMY transformations to generate the complement of a color image.
Draw the general shape of the transformation functions used to correct excessive contrast in the RGB color space.
Assume that the monitor and printer of an imaging system are imperfectly calibrated. An image that looks balanced on the monitor appears yellowish in print.
Describe general transformations that might correct the imbalance.
Compute the L * a * b* components of the image in Problem 6.6 assuming
X
0.588
C Y S = C 0.29
Z
0

 6.24

(c)

0.179
0.606
0.068

0.183
R
0.105 S C G S
1.021
B

This matrix equation defines the tristimulus values of the colors generated by
standard National Television System Committee (NTSC) color TV phosphors
viewed under D65 standard illumination (Benson [1985]).
How would you implement the color equivalent of gray scale histogram matching (specification) from Section 3.3.2?

www.EBooksWorld.ir

459

460

Chapter 6 ■ Color Image Processing
6.25

Consider the following 500 * 500 RGB image, in which the squares are fully
saturated red, green, and blue, and each of the colors is at maximum intensity
[e.g., (1, 0, 0) for the red square]. An HSI image is generated from this image.
(a) Describe the appearance of each HSI component image.
(b) The saturation component of the HSI image is smoothed using an averaging
mask of size 125 * 125. Describe the appearance of the result (you may ignore image border effects in the filtering operation).
(c) Repeat (b) for the hue image.

6.26

Green

Red

Blue

Green

Show that Eq. (6.7-2) reduces to Eq. (6.7-1) when C = I, the identity matrix.

6.27 (a) With reference to the discussion in Section 6.7.2, give a procedure (in flow
chart form) for determining whether a color vector (point) z is inside a cube
with sides W, centered at an average color vector a. Distance computations
are not allowed.
(b) This process also can be implemented on an image-by-image basis if the box
is lined up with the axes. Show how you would do it.
6.28

Sketch the surface in RGB space for the points that satisfy the equation
1

D(z, a) = [(z - a)TC-1(z - a)]2 = D0
where D0 is a specified nonzero constant. Assume that a = 0 and that
8
C = C0
0
6.29

0
1
0

0
0S
1

Refer to Section 6.7.3. One might think that a logical approach for defining the
gradient of an RGB image at any point (x, y) would be to compute the gradient
vector (see Section 3.6.4) of each component image and then form a gradient
vector for the color image by summing the three individual gradient vectors.
Unfortunately, this method can at times yield erroneous results. Specifically, it is
possible for a color image with clearly defined edges to have a zero gradient if
this method were used. Give an example of such an image. (Hint: Set one of the
color planes to a constant value to simplify your analysis.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7

Wavelets and
Multiresolution
Processing
All this time, the guard was looking at her, first through
a telescope, then through a microscope, and then
through an opera glass.
Lewis Carrol, Through the Looking Glass

Preview
Although the Fourier transform has been the mainstay of transform-based
image processing since the late 1950s, a more recent transformation, called the
wavelet transform, is now making it even easier to compress, transmit, and analyze many images. Unlike the Fourier transform, whose basis functions are sinusoids, wavelet transforms are based on small waves, called wavelets, of
varying frequency and limited duration. This allows them to provide the equivalent of a musical score for an image, revealing not only what notes (or frequencies) to play but also when to play them. Fourier transforms, on the other
hand, provide only the notes or frequency information; temporal information
is lost in the transformation process.
In 1987, wavelets were first shown to be the foundation of a powerful new
approach to signal processing and analysis called multiresolution theory (Mallat
[1987]). Multiresolution theory incorporates and unifies techniques from a variety of disciplines, including subband coding from signal processing, quadrature
mirror filtering from digital speech recognition, and pyramidal image processing.
As its name implies, multiresolution theory is concerned with the representation
and analysis of signals (or images) at more than one resolution. The appeal of
such an approach is obvious—features that might go undetected at one resolution may be easy to detect at another. Although the imaging community’s interest in multiresolution analysis was limited until the late 1980s, it is now difficult to
keep up with the number of papers, theses, and books devoted to the subject.

461
www.EBooksWorld.ir

462

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

In this chapter, we examine wavelet-based transformations from a multiresolution point of view. Although such transformations can be presented in other
ways, this approach simplifies both their mathematical and physical interpretations. We begin with an overview of imaging techniques that influenced the formulation of multiresolution theory. Our objective is to introduce the theory’s
fundamental concepts within the context of image processing and simultaneously provide a brief historical perspective of the method and its application.
The bulk of the chapter is focused on the development and use of the discrete
wavelet transform. To demonstrate the usefulness of the transform, examples
ranging from image coding to noise removal and edge detection are provided.
In the next chapter, wavelets will be used for image compression, an application
in which they have received considerable attention.

7.1

Local histograms are
histograms of the pixels
in a neighborhood (see
Section 3.3.3).

Background

When we look at images, generally we see connected regions of similar texture
and intensity levels that combine to form objects. If the objects are small in
size or low in contrast, we normally examine them at high resolutions; if they
are large in size or high in contrast, a coarse view is all that is required. If both
small and large objects—or low- and high-contrast objects—are present simultaneously, it can be advantageous to study them at several resolutions. This, of
course, is the fundamental motivation for multiresolution processing.
From a mathematical viewpoint, images are two-dimensional arrays of intensity values with locally varying statistics that result from different combinations
of abrupt features like edges and contrasting homogeneous regions.As illustrated
in Fig. 7.1—an image that will be examined repeatedly in the remainder of the

FIGURE 7.1

An image and its
local histogram
variations.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.1 ■ Background

463

section—local histograms can vary significantly from one part of an image to
another, making statistical modeling over the span of an entire image a difficult, or impossible task.

7.1.1 Image Pyramids
A powerful, yet conceptually simple structure for representing images at more
than one resolution is the image pyramid (Burt and Adelson [1983]). Originally
devised for machine vision and image compression applications, an image
pyramid is a collection of decreasing resolution images arranged in the shape
of a pyramid. As can be seen in Fig. 7.2(a), the base of the pyramid contains a
high-resolution representation of the image being processed; the apex contains a low-resolution approximation. As you move up the pyramid, both size
and resolution decrease. Base level J is of size 2J * 2J or N * N, where
J = log2 N, apex level 0 is of size 1 * 1, and general level j is of size 2j * 2j,
where 0 … j … J. Although the pyramid shown in Fig. 7.2(a) is composed of
J + 1 resolution levels from 2J * 2J to 20 * 20, most image pyramids are truncated to P + 1 levels, where 1 … P … J and j = J - P, Á , J - 2, J - 1, J.
That is, we normally limit ourselves to P reduced resolution approximations of
the original image; a 1 * 1 (i.e., single pixel) approximation of a 512 * 512
image, for example, is of little value. The total number of pixels in a P + 1 level
pyramid for P 7 0 is
N2 ¢ 1 +

1
1
1
4
+
+Á+
≤ … N2
1
2
P
3
(4)
(4)
(4)

Figure 7.2(b) shows a simple system for constructing two intimately related
image pyramids. The Level j - 1 approximation output provides the images
11

a

Level 0 (apex)

b

Level 1

22
44

FIGURE 7.2

Level 2

(a) An image
pyramid. (b) A
simple system for
creating
approximation
and prediction
residual pyramids.

Level J  1

N/ 2  N/ 2

Level J (base)

NN

Downsampler
(rows and columns)
Approximation
filter

Level j  1
approximation

2T
2c

Upsampler
(rows and columns)

Interpolation
filter
Prediction
Level j
input image




www.EBooksWorld.ir

Level j
prediction
residual

464

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

In general, a prediction
residual can be defined
as the difference
between an image and a
predicted version of the
image. As will be seen in
Section 8.2.9, prediction
residuals can often be
coded more efficiently
than 2-D intensity arrays.

needed to build an approximation pyramid (as described in the preceding
paragraph), while the Level j prediction residual output is used to build a
complementary prediction residual pyramid. Unlike approximation pyramids,
prediction residual pyramids contain only one reduced-resolution approximation of the input image (at the top of the pyramid, level J - P). All other
levels contain prediction residuals, where the level j prediction residual (for
J - P + 1 … j … J) is defined as the difference between the level j approximation (the input to the block diagram) and an estimate of the level j approximation based on the level j - 1 approximation (the approximation output in
the block diagram).
As Fig. 7.2(b) suggests, both approximation and prediction residual pyramids are computed in an iterative fashion. Before the first iteration, the image
to be represented in pyramidal form is placed in level J of the approximation
pyramid. The following three-step procedure is then executed P times—for
j = J, J - 1, Á , and J - P + 1 (in that order):
Step 1. Compute a reduced-resolution approximation of the Level j input
image [the input on the left side of the block diagram in Fig. 7.2(b)]. This is
done by filtering and downsampling the filtered result by a factor of 2. Both
of these operations are described in the next paragraph. Place the resulting
approximation at level j - 1 of the approximation pyramid.
Step 2. Create an estimate of the Level j input image from the reducedresolution approximation generated in step 1. This is done by upsampling
and filtering (see the next paragraph) the generated approximation. The resulting prediction image will have the same dimensions as the Level j input
image.
Step 3. Compute the difference between the prediction image of step 2
and the input to step 1. Place this result in level j of the prediction residual
pyramid.
At the conclusion of P iterations (i.e., following the iteration in which
j = J - P + 1), the level J - P approximation output is placed in the prediction residual pyramid at level J - P. If a prediction residual pyramid is not
needed, this operation—along with steps 2 and 3 and the upsampler, interpolation filter, and summer of Fig. 7.2(b)—can be omitted.
A variety of approximation and interpolation filters can be incorporated
into the system of Fig. 7.2(b). Typically, the filtering is performed in the spatial
domain (see Section 3.4). Useful approximation filtering techniques include
neighborhood averaging (see Section 3.5.1.), which produces mean pyramids;
lowpass Gaussian filtering (see Sections 4.7.4 and 4.8.3), which produces
Gaussian pyramids; and no filtering, which results in subsampling pyramids.
Any of the interpolation methods described in Section 2.4.4, including nearest
neighbor, bilinear, and bicubic, can be incorporated into the interpolation filter. Finally, we note that the upsampling and downsampling blocks of Fig.
7.2(b) are used to double and halve the spatial dimensions of the approximation and prediction images that are computed. Given an integer variable n and
1-D sequence of samples f(n), upsampled sequence f2c (n) is defined as

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.1 ■ Background

f2c (n) = b

f(n>2)
0

if n is even
otherwise

(7.1-1)

where, as is indicated by the subscript, the upsampling is by a factor of 2. The
complementary operation of downsampling by 2 is defined as
f2T (n) = f(2n)

(7.1-2)

465

In this chapter, we will be
working with both
continuous and discrete
functions and variables.
With the notable
exception of 2-D image
f(x, y) and unless otherwise noted, x, y, z, Á are
continuous variables;
i, j, k, l, m, n, Á are
discrete variables.

Upsampling can be thought of as inserting a 0 after every sample in a sequence;
downsampling can be viewed as discarding every other sample. The upsampling
and downsampling blocks in Fig. 7.2(b), which are labeled 2 c and 2 T, respectively,
are annotated to indicate that both the rows and columns of the 2-D inputs on
which they operate are to be up- and downsampled. Like the separable 2-D DFT
in Section 4.11.1, 2-D upsampling and downsampling can be performed by successive passes of the 1-D operations defined in Eqs. (7.1-1) and (7.1-2).

■ Figure 7.3 shows both an approximation pyramid and a prediction residual
pyramid for the vase of Fig. 7.1. A lowpass Gaussian smoothing filter (see
Section 4.7.4) was used to produce the four-level approximation pyramid in
Fig. 7.3(a). As you can see, the resulting pyramid contains the original
512 * 512 resolution image (at its base) and three low-resolution approximations (of resolution 256 * 256, 128 * 128, and 64 * 64). Thus, P is 3 and levels
9, 8, 7, and 6 out of a possible log 2 (512) + 1 or 10 levels are present. Note the
reduction in detail that accompanies the lower resolutions of the pyramid. The
level 6 (i.e., 64 * 64) approximation image is suitable for locating the window
stiles (i.e., the window pane framing), for example, but not for finding the stems
of the plant. In general, the lower-resolution levels of a pyramid can be used for
the analysis of large structures or overall image context; the high-resolution images are appropriate for analyzing individual object characteristics. Such a
coarse-to-fine analysis strategy is particularly useful in pattern recognition.
A bilinear interpolation filter was used to produce the prediction residual
pyramid in Fig. 7.3(b). In the absence of quantization error, the resulting prediction residual pyramid can be used to generate the complementary approximation pyramid in Fig. 7.3(a), including the original image, without error. To do so,
we begin with the level 6 64 * 64 approximation image (the only approximation image in the prediction residual pyramid), predict the level 7 128 * 128 resolution approximation (by upsampling and filtering), and add the level 7
prediction residual. This process is repeated using successively computed approximation images until the original 512 * 512 image is generated. Note that
the prediction residual histogram in Fig. 7.3(b) is highly peaked around zero; the
approximation histogram in Fig. 7.3(a) is not. Unlike approximation images, prediction residual images can be highly compressed by assigning fewer bits to the
more probable values (see the variable-length codes of Section 8.2.1). Finally, we
note that the prediction residuals in Fig. 7.3(b) are scaled to make small prediction errors more visible; the prediction residual histogram, however, is based on
■
the original residual values, with level 128 representing zero error.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 7.1:
Approximation
and prediction
residual pyramids.

466

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a
b
FIGURE 7.3

Two image
pyramids and
their histograms:
(a) an
approximation
pyramid;
(b) a prediction
residual pyramid.

The approximation
pyramid in (a) is called a
Gaussian pyramid
because a Gaussian filter
was used to construct it.
The prediction residual
pyramid in (b) is often
called a Laplacian
pyramid; note the
similarity in appearance
with the Laplacian filtered images in Chapter 3.

7.1.2 Subband Coding

The term “delay” implies
a time-based input
sequence and reflects the
fact that in digital signal
filtering, the input is
usually a sampled analog
signal.

Another important imaging technique with ties to multiresolution analysis is
subband coding. In subband coding, an image is decomposed into a set of
bandlimited components, called subbands. The decomposition is performed so
that the subbands can be reassembled to reconstruct the original image without error. Because the decomposition and reconstruction are performed by
means of digital filters, we begin our discussion with a brief introduction to
digital signal processing (DSP) and digital signal filtering.
Consider the simple digital filter in Fig. 7.4(a) and note that it is constructed
from three basic components—unit delays, multipliers, and adders. Along the
top of the filter, unit delays are connected in series to create K- 1 delayed
(i.e., right shifted) versions of the input sequence f(n). Delayed sequence
f(n - 2), for example, is

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.1 ■ Background

467

o
for n = 2
for n = 2 + 1 = 3
o

f(0)
f(n - 2) = d
f(1)

As the grayed annotations in Fig. 7.4(a) indicate, input sequence f(n) =
f(n - 0) and the K - 1 delayed sequences at the outputs of the unit delays,
denoted f(n - 1), f(n - 2), Á , f(n - K + 1), are multiplied by constants
h(0), h(1), Á , h(K - 1), respectively, and summed to produce the filtered
output sequence
fN(n) =

q

aqh(k)f(n - k)

k=-

(7.1-3)
= f(n)  h(n)
where  denotes convolution. Note that—except for a change in variables—
Eq. (7.1-3) is equivalent to the discrete convolution defined in Eq. (4.4-10) of
Chapter 4. The K multiplication constants in Fig. 7.4(a) and Eq. (7.1-3) are

f(n)

f(n  0)

Unit
delay

h(0)

f (n  1)

h(1)

f (n  2)

Unit
delay

h(K  1)

h(2)
h(2)f (n  2)

h(1)f (n  1)

h(0)f(n)



f (n  K  1)

Unit
delay

...

If the coefficients of the
filter in Fig. 7.4(a) are
indexed using values of n
between 0 and K - 1 (as
we have done), the limits
on the sum in Eq. (7.1-3)
can be reduced to 0 to
K - 1 [like Eq. (4.4-10)].



h(K  1)f (n  K  1)
fˆ(n)  f (n)  h(n)



...

h(0)f (n)  h(1)f (n  1)
h(0)f (n)  h(1)f (n  1)  h(2)f (n  2)
K1
k0

1
Impulse response h(n)

Input sequence f (n)  (n)

1

0

1
1 0 1 2 . . .

... K1

h(k)f (n  k)  f (n)  h(n)

h(1)
h(2)
h(0)

h(K  1)

h(3)
0

...
h(4)

1
1 0 1 2 . . .

n

... K1
n

a
b c
FIGURE 7.4 (a) A digital filter; (b) a unit discrete impulse sequence; and (c) the impulse response of the filter.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

468

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

called filter coefficients. Each coefficient defines a filter tap, which can be
thought of as the components needed to compute one term of the sum in Eq.
(7.1-3), and the filter is said to be of order K.
If the input to the filter of Fig. 7.4(a) is the unit discrete impulse of
Fig. 7.4(b) and Section 4.2.3, Eq. (7.1-3) becomes
fN(n) =

q

a h(k)d(n - k)

k = -q

(7.1-4)

= h(n)

In the remainder of the
chapter, “filter h(n)” will
be used to refer to the
filter whose impulse
response is h(n).

That is, by substituting d(n) for input f(n) in Eq. (7.1-3) and making use of
the sifting property of the unit discrete impulse as defined in Eq. (4.2-13), we
find that the impulse response of the filter in Fig. 7.4(a) is the K-element sequence of filter coefficients that define the filter. Physically, the unit impulse
is shifted from left to right across the top of the filter (from one unit delay to
the next), producing an output that assumes the value of the coefficient at
the location of the delayed impulse. Because there are K coefficients, the impulse response is of length K and the filter is called a finite impulse response
(FIR) filter.
Figure 7.5 shows the impulse responses of six functionally related filters. Filter h2(n) in Fig. 7.5(b) is a sign-reversed (i.e., reflected about the horizontal
axis) version of h1(n) in Fig. 7.5(a). That is,
h2(n) = -h1(n)

1

h1(n)

0

1

1

h2(n)  h1(n)

0

. . . 3 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . . .
n

h4(n)  h1(K  1  n)

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

h3(n)  h1(n)

0

. . . 3 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . . .
n

h5(n)  (1)nh1(n)

0

. . . 3 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . . .
n

(7.1-5)

1

1

. . . 3 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . . .
n

h6(n)  (1)nh1(K  1  n)

0

. . . 3 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . . .
n

1

. . . 3 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 . . .
n

a b c
d e f
FIGURE 7.5 Six functionally related filter impulse responses: (a) reference response; (b) sign reversal;
(c) and (d) order reversal (differing by the delay introduced); (e) modulation; and (f) order reversal and
modulation.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.1 ■ Background

Filters h3(n) and h4(n) in Figs. 7.5(c) and (d) are order-reversed versions of
h1(n):
h3(n) = h1(-n)

(7.1-6)

h4(n) = h1(K - 1 - n)

(7.1-7)

469

Order reversal is often
called time reversal when
the input sequence is a
sampled analog signal.

Filter h3(n) is a reflection of h1(n) about the vertical axis; filter h4(n) is a reflected and translated (i.e., shifted) version of h1(n). Neglecting translation,
the responses of the two filters are identical. Filter h5(n) in Fig. 7.5(e), which is
defined as
h5(n) = (-1)nh1(n)

(7.1-8)

is called a modulated version of h1(n). Because modulation changes the signs
of all odd-indexed coefficients [i.e., the coefficients for which n is odd in
Fig. 7.5(e)], h5(1) = -h1(1) and h5(3) = -h1(3), while h5(0) = h1(0) and
h5(2) = h1(2). Finally, the sequence shown in Fig. 7.5(f) is an order-reversed
version of h1(n) that is also modulated:
h6(n) = (-1)nh1(K - 1 - n)

(7.1-9)

This sequence is included to illustrate the fact that sign reversal, order reversal, and modulation are sometimes combined in the specification of the relationship between two filters.
With this brief introduction to digital signal filtering, consider the two-band
subband coding and decoding system in Fig. 7.6(a). As indicated in the figure,
the system is composed of two filter banks, each containing two FIR filters of
the type shown in Fig. 7.4(a). Note that each of the four FIR filters is depicted

a
b

flp(n)
 h0(n)
f(n)

2T

Analysis filter bank
 h1(n)

 g0(n)

2c

FIGURE 7.6

Synthesis filter bank 

2T

 g1(n)

2c
fhp(n)

0

H0()

H1()

Low band

High band

/ 2

A filter bank is a collection of two or more filters.





www.EBooksWorld.ir

fˆ(n)

(a) A two-band
subband coding
and decoding
system, and (b) its
spectrum splitting
properties.

470

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

By real-coefficient, we
mean that the filter
coefficients are real (not
complex) numbers.

Equations (7.1-10)
through (7.1-14) are
described in detail in the
filter bank literature (see,
for example, Vetterli and
Kovacevic [1995]).

as a single block in Fig. 7.6(a), with the impulse response of each filter (and the
convolution symbol) written inside it. The analysis filter bank, which includes
filters h0 (n) and h1(n), is used to break input sequence f(n) into two halflength sequences flp(n) and fhp(n), the subbands that represent the input. Note
that filters h0 (n) and h1(n) are half-band filters whose idealized transfer characteristics, H0 and H1, are shown in Fig. 7.6(b). Filter h0 (n) is a lowpass filter
whose output, subband flp(n), is called an approximation of f(n); filter h1(n) is
a highpass filter whose output, subband fhp (n), is called the high frequency or
detail part of f(n). Synthesis bank filters g0 (n) and g1 (n) combine flp(n) and
fhp(n) to produce fN(n). The goal in subband coding is to select h0 (n), h1(n),
g0 (n), and g1 (n) so that fN(n) = f(n). That is, so that the input and output of the
subband coding and decoding system are identical. When this is accomplished,
the resulting system is said to employ perfect reconstruction filters.
There are many two-band, real-coefficient, FIR, perfect reconstruction filter banks described in the filter bank literature. In all of them, the synthesis filters are modulated versions of the analysis filters—with one (and only one)
synthesis filter being sign reversed as well. For perfect reconstruction, the impulse responses of the synthesis and analysis filters must be related in one of
the following two ways:
g0 (n) = (-1)nh1(n)

(7.1-10)

g1 (n) = (-1)n + 1h0 (n)
or
g0 (n) = (-1)n + 1h1(n)

(7.1-11)

g1 (n) = (-1)nh0 (n)

Filters h0 (n), h1(n), g0 (n), and g1(n) in Eqs. (7.1-10) and (7.1-11) are said to be
cross-modulated because diagonally opposed filters in the block diagram of
Fig. 7.6(a) are related by modulation [and sign reversal when the modulation
factor is -( -1)n or (-1)n + 1]. Moreover, they can be shown to satisfy the following biorthogonality condition:
8hi (2n - k), gj (k)9 = d(i - j)d(n),

i, j = 50, 16

(7.1-12)

Here, 8hi (2n - k), gj (k)9 denotes the inner product of hi (2n - k) and gj (k).†
When i is not equal to j, the inner product is 0; when i and j are equal, the
product is the unit discrete impulse function, d(n). Biorthogonality will be considered again in Section 7.2.1.
Of special interest in subband coding—and in the development of the fast
wavelet transform of Section 7.4—are filters that move beyond biorthogonality
and require
The vector inner product of sequences f1 (n) and f2 (n) is 8f1, f29 = a f*1(n)f2 (n), where the * denotes

†

the complex conjugate operation. If f1 (n) and f2 (n) are real, 8f1, f29 = 8f2, f19.
n

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.1 ■ Background

8gi (n), gj (n + 2m)9 = d(i - j)d(m),

i, j = 50, 16

471

(7.1-13)

which defines orthonormality for perfect reconstruction filter banks. In addition to Eq. (7.1-13), orthonormal filters can be shown to satisfy the following
two conditions:
g1 (n) = (-1)ng0 (Keven - 1 - n)
hi (n) = gi (Keven - 1 - n),

i = 50, 16

(7.1-14)

where the subscript on Keven is used to indicate that the number of filter coefficients must be divisible by 2 (i.e., an even number). As Eq. (7.1-14) indicates,
synthesis filter g1 is related to g0 by order reversal and modulation. In addition, both h0 and h1 are order-reversed versions of synthesis filters, g0 and g1,
respectively. Thus, an orthonormal filter bank can be developed around the
impulse response of a single filter, called the prototype; the remaining filters
can be computed from the specified prototype’s impulse response. For
biorthogonal filter banks, two prototypes are required; the remaining filters
can be computed via Eq. (7.1-10) or (7.1-11). The generation of useful prototype filters, whether orthonormal or biorthogonal, is beyond the scope of this
chapter. We simply use filters that have been presented in the literature and
provide references for further study.
Before concluding the section with a 2-D subband coding example, we note
that 1-D orthonormal and biorthogonal filters can be used as 2-D separable
filters for the processing of images. As can be seen in Fig. 7.7, the separable filters are first applied in one dimension (e.g., vertically) and then in the other
(e.g., horizontally) in the manner introduced in Section 2.6.7. Moreover, downsampling is performed in two stages—once before the second filtering operation to reduce the overall number of computations. The resulting filtered

 h0 (n)
 h0 (m)

a(m,n)

Columns
(along n)

2T
Rows
(along m)

FIGURE 7.7
2T

 h1 (n)

2T

dV(m,n)

Columns

f(m,n)
 h0 (n)

2T

dH(m,n)

Columns
 h1 (m)

2T
Rows
 h1 (n)

2T
Columns

www.EBooksWorld.ir

dD(m,n)

A twodimensional, fourband filter bank
for subband
image coding.

472

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

outputs, denoted a(m, n), dV(m, n), d H(m, n), and dD(m, n) in Fig. 7.7, are
called the approximation, vertical detail, horizontal detail, and diagonal detail
subbands of the input image, respectively. These subbands can be split into
four smaller subbands, which can be split again, and so on—a property that
will be described in greater detail in Section 7.4.
EXAMPLE 7.2:
A four-band
subband coding of
the vase in Fig. 7.1.

■ Figure 7.8 shows the impulse responses of four 8-tap orthonormal filters.
The coefficients of prototype synthesis filter g0 (n) for 0 … n … 7 [in Fig. 7.8(c)]
are defined in Table 7.1 (Daubechies [1992]). The coefficients of the remaining
orthonormal filters can be computed using Eq. (7.1-14). With the help of Fig.
7.5, note (by visual inspection) the cross modulation of the analysis and synthesis filters in Fig. 7.8. It is relatively easy to show numerically that the filters are

TABLE 7.1
Daubechies 8-tap
orthonormal filter
coefficients for
g0(n) (Daubechies
[1992]).

a b
c d
FIGURE 7.8

The impulse
responses of four
8-tap Daubechies
orthonormal
filters. See
Table 7.1 for the
values of g0 (n) for
0 … n … 7.

n

g0(n)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.23037781
0.71484657
0.63088076
-0.02798376
-0.18703481
0.03084138
0.03288301
-0.01059740

h0(n)
1

h1(n)
1

0.5

0.5

0

0

0.5

0.5

1

n
0

2

4

6

8

g0 (n)
1

1

0.5

0

0

0.5

0.5
n
0

2

4

6

8

2

4

6

8

g1(n)
1

0.5

1

n
0

2

4

6

8

www.EBooksWorld.ir

1

n
0

7.1 ■ Background

473

a b
c d
FIGURE 7.9

A four-band split
of the vase in
Fig. 7.1 using the
subband coding
system of Fig. 7.7.
The four
subbands that
result are the
(a) approximation,
(b) horizontal
detail, (c) vertical
detail, and
(d) diagonal detail
subbands.

both biorthogonal (they satisfy Eq. 7.1-12) and orthonormal (they satisfy Eq. 7.113). As a result, the Daubechies 8-tap filters in Fig. 7.8 support error-free reconstruction of the decomposed input.
A four-band split of the 512 * 512 image of a vase in Fig. 7.1, based on the
filters in Fig. 7.8, is shown in Fig. 7.9. Each quadrant of this image is a subband
of size 256 * 256. Beginning with the upper-left corner and proceeding in a
clockwise manner, the four quadrants contain approximation subband a, horizontal detail subband d H, diagonal detail subband dD, and vertical detail subband dV, respectively. All subbands, except the approximation subband in
Fig. 7.9(a), have been scaled to make their underlying structure more visible.
Note the visual effects of aliasing that are present in Figs. 7.9(b) and (c)—the dH
and dV subbands. The wavy lines in the window area are due to the downsampling of a barely discernable window screen in Fig. 7.1. Despite the aliasing, the
original image can be reconstructed from the subbands in Fig. 7.9 without
error. The required synthesis filters, g0 (n) and g1 (n), are determined from
Table 7.1 and Eq. (7.1-14), and incorporated into a filter bank that roughly
mirrors the system in Fig. 7.7. In the new filter bank, filters hi (n) for i = 50, 16
are replaced by their gi (n) counterparts, and upsamplers and summers are
■
added.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

See Section 4.5.4 for
more on aliasing.

474

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

7.1.3 The Haar Transform
The third and final imaging-related operation with ties to multiresolution
analysis that we will look at is the Haar transform (Haar [1910]). Within
the context of this chapter, its importance stems from the fact that its basis
functions (defined below) are the oldest and simplest known orthonormal
wavelets. They will be used in a number of examples in the sections that
follow.
With reference to the discussion in Section 2.6.7, the Haar transform can be
expressed in the following matrix form
T = HFH T

(7.1-15)

where F is an N * N image matrix, H is an N * N Haar transformation
matrix, and T is the resulting N * N transform. The transpose is required
because H is not symmetric; in Eq. (2.6-38) of Section 2.6.7, the transformation matrix is assumed to be symmetric. For the Haar transform, H contains
the Haar basis functions, hk(z). They are defined over the continuous, closed
interval z H [0, 1] for k = 0, 1, 2, Á , N - 1, where N = 2 n. To generate H,
we define the integer k such that k = 2 p + q - 1, where 0 … p … n - 1,
q = 0 or 1 for p = 0, and 1 … q … 2 p for p Z 0. Then the Haar basis functions are
h0 (z) = h00 (z) =

1
,
1N

z H [0, 1]

(7.1-16)

(q - 1)>2 p … z 6 (q - 0.5)>2 p
(q - 0.5)>2 p … z 6 q>2 p
otherwise, z H [0, 1]

(7.1-17)

and
2 p>2
1
hk(z) = hpq (z) =
c -2 p>2
1N
0

The ith row of an N * N Haar transformation matrix contains the elements
of hi (z) for z = 0>N, 1>N, 2>N, Á , (N - 1)>N. For instance, if N = 2, the
first row of the 2 * 2 Haar matrix is computed using h0(z) with z = 0>2, 1>2.
From Eq. (7.1-16), h0 (z) is equal to 1> 1 2, independent of z, so the first row of
H 2 has two identical 1> 1 2 elements. The second row is obtained by computing
h1(z) for z = 0>2, 1>2. Because k = 2 p + q - 1, when k = 1, p = 0 and
q = 1. Thus, from Eq. (7.1-17), h1(0) = 2 0> 12 = 1> 12, h1 (1>2) = -2 0> 12
= -1> 1 2, and the 2 * 2 Haar matrix is
H2 =

1 1
B
12 1

www.EBooksWorld.ir

1
R
-1

(7.1-18)

7.1 ■ Background

475

If N = 4, k, q, and p assume the values
k

p

q

0
1
2
3

0
0
1
1

0
1
1
2

and the 4 * 4 transformation matrix, H 4, is
1
1
1
H4 =
D
1
2
14
0

1
1
-12
0

1
-1
0
12

1
-1
T
0
-12

(7.1-19)

Our principal interest in the Haar transform is that the rows of H 2 can be used
to define the analysis filters, h0 (n) and h1(n), of a 2-tap perfect reconstruction
filter bank (see the previous section), as well as the scaling and wavelet vectors
(defined in Sections 7.2.2 and 7.2.3, respectively) of the simplest and oldest
wavelet transform (see Example 7.10 in Section 7.4). Rather than concluding
the section with the computation of a Haar transform, we close with an example that illustrates the influence of the decomposition methods that have been
considered to this point on the methods that will be developed in the remainder
of the chapter.

■ Figure 7.10(a) shows a decomposition of the 512 * 512 image in Fig. 7.1
that combines the key features of pyramid coding, subband coding, and the
Haar transform (the three techniques we have discussed so far). Called the
discrete wavelet transform (and developed later in the chapter), the representation is characterized by the following important features:
1. With the exception of the subimage in the upper-left corner of Fig. 7.10(a),
the local histograms are very similar. Many of the pixels are close to zero.
Because the subimages (except for the subimage in the upper-left corner)
have been scaled to make their underlying structure more visible, the displayed histograms are peaked at intensity 128 (the zeroes have been
scaled to mid-gray). The large number of zeroes in the decomposition
makes the image an excellent candidate for compression (see Chapter 8).
2. In a manner that is similar to the way in which the levels of the prediction
residual pyramid of Fig. 7.3(b) were used to create approximation images
of differing resolutions, the subimages in Fig. 7.10(a) can be used to construct both coarse and fine resolution approximations of the original
vase image in Fig. 7.1. Figures 7.10(b) through (d), which are of size

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 7.3:
Haar functions in
a discrete wavelet
transform.

476

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a
b c d
FIGURE 7.10

(a) A discrete
wavelet transform
using Haar H 2
basis functions. Its
local histogram
variations are also
shown. (b)–(d)
Several different
approximations
(64 * 64,
128 * 128, and
256 * 256) that
can be obtained
from (a).

64 * 64, 128 * 128, and 256 * 256, respectively, were generated from
the subimages in Fig. 7.10(a). A perfect 512 * 512 reconstruction of the
original image is also possible.
3. Like the subband coding decomposition in Fig. 7.9, a simple real-coefficient,
FIR filter bank of the form given in Fig. 7.7 was used to produce Fig. 7.10(a).
After the generation of a four subband image like that of Fig. 7.9, the
256 * 256 approximation subband was decomposed and replaced by four
128 * 128 subbands (using the same filter bank), and the resulting approximation subband was again decomposed and replaced by four 64 * 64 subbands. This process produced the unique arrangement of subimages that

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.2 ■ Multiresolution Expansions

characterizes discrete wavelet transforms. The subimages in Fig. 7.10(a)
become smaller in size as you move from the lower-right-hand to upperleft-hand corner of the image.
4. Figure 7.10(a) is not the Haar transform of the image in Fig. 7.1. Although
the filter bank coefficients that were used to produce this decomposition
were taken from Haar transformation matrix H 2, a variety of othronormal
and biorthogonal filter bank coefficients can be used in discrete wavelet
transforms.
5. As will be shown in Section 7.4, each subimage in Fig. 7.10(a) represents a
specific band of spatial frequencies in the original image. In addition,
many of the subimages demonstrate directional sensitivity [e.g., the
subimage in the upper-right corner of Fig. 7.10(a) captures horizontal edge
information in the original image].
Considering this impressive list of features, it is remarkable that the discrete
wavelet transform of Fig. 7.10(a) was generated using two 2-tap digital filters
with a total of four filter coefficients.
■

7.2

Multiresolution Expansions

The previous section introduced three well-known imaging techniques that
play an important role in a mathematical framework called multiresolution
analysis (MRA). In MRA, a scaling function is used to create a series of approximations of a function or image, each differing by a factor of 2 in resolution from its nearest neighboring approximations. Additional functions, called
wavelets, are then used to encode the difference in information between adjacent approximations.

7.2.1 Series Expansions
A signal or function f(x) can often be better analyzed as a linear combination
of expansion functions
f(x) = a ak wk (x)

(7.2-1)

k

where k is an integer index of a finite or infinite sum, the ak are real-valued
expansion coefficients, and the wk(x) are real-valued expansion functions. If
the expansion is unique—that is, there is only one set of ak for any given f(x)—
the wk(x) are called basis functions, and the expansion set, E wk(x) F , is called a
basis for the class of functions that can be so expressed. The expressible functions form a function space that is referred to as the closed span of the expansion set, denoted
V = Span E wk(x) F
k

(7.2-2)

To say that f(x) H V means that f(x) is in the closed span of E wk(x) F and can
be written in the form of Eq. (7.2-1).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

477

478

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

For any function space V and corresponding expansion set E wk(x) F , there is a
'
set of dual functions denoted E wk(x) F that can be used to compute the ak coefficients of Eq. (7.2-1) for any f(x) H V. These coefficients are computed by taking
'
the integral inner products† of the dual wk(x) and function f(x). That is,
ak = 8wk(x), f(x)9 =
'

'

L

w*k(x)f(x) dx

(7.2-3)

where the * denotes the complex conjugate operation. Depending on the orthogonality of the expansion set, this computation assumes one of three possible forms. Problem 7.10 at the end of the chapter illustrates the three cases
using vectors in two-dimensional Euclidean space.
Case 1: If the expansion functions form an orthonormal basis for V,
meaning that
8wj (x), wk (x)9 = djk = b

0
1

j Z k
j = k

(7.2-4)
'

the basis and its dual are equivalent. That is, wk(x) = wk(x) and Eq. (7.2-3)
becomes
ak = 8wk(x), f(x)9

(7.2-5)

The ak are computed as the inner products of the basis functions and f(x).
Case 2: If the expansion functions are not orthonormal, but are an orthogonal basis for V, then
8wj (x), wk (x)9 = 0

j Z k

(7.2-6)

and the basis functions and their duals are called biorthogonal. The ak are
computed using Eq. (7.2-3), and the biorthogonal basis and its dual are
such that
8wj (x), wk(x)9 = djk = b
'

0
1

j Z k
j = k

(7.2-7)

Case 3: If the expansion set is not a basis for V, but supports the expansion defined in Eq. (7.2-1), it is a spanning set in which there is more than
one set of ak for any f(x) H V. The expansion functions and their duals are
said to be overcomplete or redundant. They form a frame in which‡
A7f(x)7 2 … a ƒ 8wk(x), f(x)9 ƒ 2 … B7f(x)7 2

(7.2-8)

k

The integral inner product of two real or complex-valued functions f(x) and g(x) is 8f(x), g(x)9 =

†

f*(x)g(x) dx. If f(x) is real, f*(x) = f(x) and 8f(x), g(x)9 = f(x)g(x) dx.
L
L
The norm of f(x), denoted 7f(x)7, is defined as the square root of the absolute value of the inner product of f(x) with itself.

‡

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.2 ■ Multiresolution Expansions

for some A 7 0, B 6 q , and all f(x) H V. Dividing this equation by the
norm squared of f(x), we see that A and B “frame” the normalized inner
products of the expansion coefficients and the function. Equations similar
to (7.2-3) and (7.2-5) can be used to find the expansion coefficients for
frames. If A = B, the expansion set is called a tight frame and it can be
shown that (Daubechies [1992])
f(x) =

1
8wk(x), f(x)9wk(x)
Aa
k

(7.2-9)

Except for the A-1 term, which is a measure of the frame’s redundancy,
this is identical to the expression obtained by substituting Eq. (7.2-5) (for
orthonormal bases) into Eqs. (7.2-1).

7.2.2 Scaling Functions
Consider the set of expansion functions composed of integer translations and
binary scalings of the real, square-integrable function w(x); this is the set
E wj, k(x) F , where
wj, k(x) = 2j>2w(2jx - k)

(7.2-10)

for all j, k H Z and w(x) H L2(R).† Here, k determines the position of wj, k(x)
along the x-axis, and j determines the width of wj, k(x)—that is, how broad or
narrow it is along the x-axis. The term 2 j>2 controls the amplitude of the function. Because the shape of wj, k(x) changes with j, w(x) is called a scaling function.
By choosing w(x) properly, E wj, k(x) F can be made to span L2(R), which is the
set of all measurable, square-integrable functions.
If we restrict j in Eq. (7.2-10) to a specific value, say j = j0 , the resulting
expansion set, E wj0, k(x) F , is a subset of E wj, k(x) F that spans a subspace of L2(R).
Using the notation of the previous section, we can define that subspace as
Vj0 = Span E wj0 , k(x) F

(7.2-11)

k

That is, Vj0 is the span of wj0 , k(x) over k. If f(x) H Vj0, we can write
f(x) = a ak wj0 , k(x)

(7.2-12)

k

More generally, we will denote the subspace spanned over k for any j as
Vj = Span E wj, k(x) F

(7.2-13)

k

As will be seen in the following example, increasing j increases the size of Vj,
allowing functions with smaller variations or finer detail to be included in the
subspace. This is a consequence of the fact that, as j increases, the wj, k(x) that
are used to represent the subspace functions become narrower and separated
by smaller changes in x.
†

The notation L2(R), where R is the set of real numbers, denotes the set of measurable, square-integrable,
one-dimensional functions; Z is the set of integers.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

479

480

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

EXAMPLE 7.4:
The Haar scaling
function.

■ Consider the unit-height, unit-width scaling function (Haar [1910])
w(x) = b

1
0

0 … x 6 1
otherwise

(7.2-14)

Figures 7.11(a) through (d) show four of the many expansion functions that
can be generated by substituting this pulse-shaped scaling function into
Eq. (7.2-10). Note that the expansion functions for j = 1 in Figs. 7.11(c) and
(d) are half as wide as those for j = 0 in Figs. 7.11(a) and (b). For a given interval on x, we can define twice as many V1 scaling functions as V0 scaling functions (e.g., w1, 0 and w1, 1 of V1 versus w0, 0 of V0 for the interval 0 … x 6 1).
Figure 7.11(e) shows a member of subspace V1. This function does not belong to V0, because the V0 expansion functions in 7.11(a) and (b) are too
coarse to represent it. Higher-resolution functions like those in 7.11(c) and (d)
a b
c d
e f
FIGURE 7.11

w0, 0 (x)  w (x)

w0, 1(x)  w (x  1)

1

1

0

0

Some Haar
scaling functions.

0

1

2

3

x

x
0

1

w1, 0(x)  2 w (2x)

w1, 1(x)  2 w(2x  1)

1

1

0

0

0

1

2

3

x

0

1

2

3

2

3

x

w0, 0 (x) H V1

f(x) H V1
1, 1

1

1

w1, 1/ 2

0.25 1, 4

0

0
0.5 1, 0

0

1

w1,0/ 2
2

3

x

www.EBooksWorld.ir

0

1

2

3

x

7.2 ■ Multiresolution Expansions

481

are required. They can be used, as shown in (e), to represent the function by
the three-term expansion
f(x) = 0.5w1, 0 (x) + w1, 1 (x) - 0.25w1, 4 (x)
To conclude the example, Fig. 7.11(f) illustrates the decomposition of
w0, 0 (x) as a sum of V1 expansion functions. In a similar manner, any V0 expansion function can be decomposed using
w0, k(x) =

1
1
w1, 2k (x) +
w1, 2k + 1 (x)
12
12

Thus, if f(x) is an element of V0, it is also an element of V1. This is because all
V0 expansion functions are contained in V1. Mathematically, we write that V0 is
a subspace of V1, denoted V0 ( V1.
■
The simple scaling function in the preceding example obeys the four fundamental requirements of multiresolution analysis (Mallat [1989a]):
MRA Requirement 1: The scaling function is orthogonal to its integer
translates.
This is easy to see in the case of the Haar function, because whenever it has a
value of 1, its integer translates are 0, so that the product of the two is 0. The
Haar scaling function is said to have compact support, which means that it is
0 everywhere outside a finite interval called the support. In fact, the width of
the support is 1; it is 0 outside the half open interval [0, 1). It should be noted
that the requirement for orthogonal integer translates becomes harder to
satisfy as the width of support of the scaling function becomes larger than 1.
MRA Requirement 2: The subspaces spanned by the scaling function at low
scales are nested within those spanned at higher scales.
As can be seen in Fig. 7.12, subspaces containing high-resolution functions
must also contain all lower resolution functions. That is,
V- q ( Á ( V-1 ( V0 ( V1 ( V2 ( Á ( Vq
(7.2-15)
Moreover, the subspaces satisfy the intuitive condition that if f(x) H Vj, then
f(2x) H Vj + 1. The fact that the Haar scaling function meets this requirement
V0

V1

V2

FIGURE 7.12

The nested
function spaces
spanned by a
scaling function.

V0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

482

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

should not be taken to indicate that any function with a support width of 1
automatically satisfies the condition. It is left as an exercise for the reader
to show that the equally simple function
w(x) = b

0.25 … x 6 0.75
elsewhere

1
0

is not a valid scaling function for a multiresolution analysis (see Problem 7.11).
MRA Requirement 3: The only function that is common to all Vj is f(x) = 0.
If we consider the coarsest possible expansion functions (i.e., j = - q ),
the only representable function is the function of no information. That is,
V- q = 506

(7.2-16)

MRA Requirement 4:Any function can be represented with arbitrary precision.
Though it may not be possible to expand a particular f(x) at an arbitrarily
coarse resolution, as was the case for the function in Fig. 7.11(e), all measurable, square-integrable functions can be represented by the scaling
functions in the limit as j : q . That is,
Vq = E L2(R) F

(7.2-17)

Under these conditions, the expansion functions of subspace Vj can be expressed as a weighted sum of the expansion functions of subspace Vj + 1. Using
Eq. (7.2-12), we let
wj, k (x) = a an wj + 1, n (x)
n

The an are changed to
hw(n) because they are
used later (see Section
7.4) as filter bank
coefficients.

where the index of summation has been changed to n for clarity. Substituting
for wj + 1, n (x) from Eq. (7.2-10) and changing variable an to hw(n), this becomes
wj, k (x) = a hw(n)2 (j + 1)>2w(2 j + 1x - n)
n

Because w(x) = w0, 0 (x), both j and k can be set to 0 to obtain the simpler nonsubscripted expression
w(x) = a hw(n)12w(2x - n)

(7.2-18)

n

The hw(n) coefficients in this recursive equation are called scaling function coefficients; hw is referred to as a scaling vector. Equation (7.2-18) is fundamental
to multiresolution analysis and is called the refinement equation, the MRA
equation, or the dilation equation. It states that the expansion functions of any
subspace can be built from double-resolution copies of themselves—that is,
from expansion functions of the next higher resolution space. The choice of a
reference subspace, V0, is arbitrary.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.2 ■ Multiresolution Expansions

■ The scaling function coefficients for the Haar function of Eq. (7.2-14)
are hw(0) = hw(1) = 1> 12, the first row of matrix H 2 in Eq. (7.1-18). Thus,
Eq. (7.2-18) yields
w(x) =

1
1
C 12w(2x) D +
C 12w(2x - 1) D
12
12

483

EXAMPLE 7.5:
Haar scaling
function
coefficients.

This decomposition was illustrated graphically for w0, 0 (x) in Fig. 7.11(f), where
the bracketed terms of the preceding expression are seen to be w1, 0 (x) and
w1, 1 (x). Additional simplification yields w(x) = w(2x) + w(2x - 1).
■

7.2.3 Wavelet Functions
Given a scaling function that meets the MRA requirements of the previous
section, we can define a wavelet function c(x) that, together with its integer
translates and binary scalings, spans the difference between any two adjacent
scaling subspaces, Vj and Vj + 1. The situation is illustrated graphically in Fig. 7.13.
We define the set 5cj, k (x)6 of wavelets
cj, k (x) = 2 j>2c(2 jx - k)

(7.2-19)

for all k H Z that span the Wj spaces in the figure. As with scaling functions, we
write
(7.2-20)
Wj = Span E cj, k (x) F
k

and note that if f(x) H Wj,
f(x) = a ak cj, k (x)

(7.2-21)

k

The scaling and wavelet function subspaces in Fig. 7.13 are related by
Vj + 1 = Vj { Wj

(7.2-22)

where { denotes the union of spaces (like the union of sets). The orthogonal
complement of Vj in Vj + 1 is Wj, and all members of Vj are orthogonal to the
members of Wj. Thus,
8wj, k (x), cj, l (x)9 = 0
(7.2-23)
for all appropriate j, k, l H Z.
V2  V1 { W1 V0 { W0 { W1

FIGURE 7.13
V1  V0 { W0

W1
W0
V0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

The relationship
between scaling
and wavelet
function spaces.

484

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

We can now express the space of all measurable, square-integrable functions as
L2(R) = V0 { W0 { W1 { Á

(7.2-24)

L2(R) = V1 { W1 { W2 { Á

(7.2-25)

L2(R) = Á { W-2 { W-1 { W0 { W1 { W2 { Á

(7.2-26)

or

or even

which eliminates the scaling function, and represents a function in terms of
wavelets alone [i.e., there are only wavelet function spaces in Eq. (7.2-26)].
Note that if f(x) is an element of V1, but not V0, an expansion using Eq. (7.2-24)
contains an approximation of f(x) using V0 scaling functions. Wavelets from
W0 would encode the difference between this approximation and the actual
function. Equations (7.2-24) through (7.2-26) can be generalized to yield
L2(R) = Vj0 { Wj0 { Wj0 + 1 { Á

(7.2-27)

where j0 is an arbitrary starting scale.
Since wavelet spaces reside within the spaces spanned by the next higher
resolution scaling functions (see Fig. 7.13), any wavelet function—like its scaling function counterpart of Eq. (7.2-18)—can be expressed as a weighted sum
of shifted, double-resolution scaling functions. That is, we can write
c(x) = a hc(n)12w(2x - n)

(7.2-28)

n

where the hc(n) are called the wavelet function coefficients and hc is the
wavelet vector. Using the condition that wavelets span the orthogonal complement spaces in Fig. 7.13 and that integer wavelet translates are orthogonal, it
can be shown that hc(n) is related to hw(n) by (see, for example, Burrus,
Gopinath, and Guo [1998])
hc(n) = (-1)n hw(1 - n)

(7.2-29)

Note the similarity of this result and Eq. (7.1-14), the relationship governing
the impulse responses of orthonormal subband coding and decoding filters.

EXAMPLE 7.6:
The Haar wavelet
function
coefficients.

■ In the previous example, the Haar scaling vector was defined as

hw(0) = hw(1) = 1> 12. Using Eq. (7.2-29), the corresponding wavelet
vector is hc(0) = (-1)0hw(1 - 0) = 1> 12 and hc(1) = (-1)1hw(1 - 1)
= -1> 12. Note that these coefficients correspond to the second row of matrix H2 in Eq. (7.1-18). Substituting these values into Eq. (7.2-28), we get

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.2 ■ Multiresolution Expansions

485

c(x) = w(2x) - w(2x - 1), which is plotted in Fig. 7.14(a). Thus, the Haar
wavelet function is
1
c(x) = c -1
0

0 … x 6 0.5
0.5 … x 6 1
elsewhere

(7.2-30)

Using Eq. (7.2-19), we can now generate the universe of scaled and translated
Haar wavelets.Two such wavelets, c0, 2 (x) and c1, 0 (x), are plotted in Figs. 7.14(b)
and (c), respectively. Note that wavelet c1, 0 (x) for space W1 is narrower than
c0, 2 (x) for W0; it can be used to represent finer detail.
Figure 7.14(d) shows a function of subspace V1 that is not in subspace V0. This
function was considered in an earlier example [see Fig. 7.11(e)]. Although the
function cannot be represented accurately in V0, Eq. (7.2-22) indicates that it can
be expanded using V0 and W0 expansion functions. The resulting expansion is
f(x) = fa (x) + fd (x)
c(x)  c0, 0 (x)

c0, 2 (x)  c(x  2)

1

1

0

0

1

1

a b
c d
e f
FIGURE 7.14

0

1

2

3

x

Haar wavelet
functions in W0
and W1.

0

1

c1, 0 (x)  2 c(2x)

f (x) H V1  V0 { W0

1

1

0

0

1

1
0

1

2

3

x

fa(x) H V0

0

1

2

3

2

3

x

x

fd (x) H W0
3 2/4 w0, 0

1

1

0

 2/8 c0, 2

0
 2/8 w0, 2

1
0

1

2

 2/4 c0, 0

1
3

x

0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

1

2

3

x

486

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

where
fa (x) =

312
12
w0, 0 (x) w (x)
4
8 0, 2

fd (x) =

- 12
12
c0, 0 (x) c (x)
4
8 0, 2

and

Here, fa (x) is an approximation of f(x) using V0 scaling functions, while fd (x)
is the difference f(x) - fa (x) as a sum of W0 wavelets. The two expansions,
which are shown in Figs. 7.14(e) and (f), divide f(x) in a manner similar to a
lowpass and highpass filter as discussed in connection with Fig. 7.6. The low
frequencies of f(x) are captured in fa (x)—it assumes the average value of
f(x) in each integer interval—while the high-frequency details are encoded in
fd (x).
■

7.3

Wavelet Transforms in One Dimension

We can now formally define several closely related wavelet transformations:
the generalized wavelet series expansion, the discrete wavelet transform, and
the continuous wavelet transform. Their counterparts in the Fourier domain
are the Fourier series expansion, the discrete Fourier transform, and the integral Fourier transform, respectively. In Section 7.4, we develop a computationally efficient implementation of the discrete wavelet transform called the fast
wavelet transform.

7.3.1 The Wavelet Series Expansions
We begin by defining the wavelet series expansion of function f(x) H L2(R) relative to wavelet c(x) and scaling function w(x). In accordance with Eq. (7.2-27),
f(x) can be represented by a scaling function expansion in subspace Vj0
[Eq. (7.2-12) defines such an expansion] and some number of wavelet function expansions in subspaces Wj0, Wj0 + 1, Á [as defined in Eq. (7.2-21)]. Thus,
q

f(x) = a cj0(k)wj0, k (x) + a a dj(k)cj, k (x)
k

(7.3-1)

j = j0 k

where j0 is an arbitrary starting scale and the cj0(k) and dj (k) are relabeled ak
from Eqs. (7.2-12) and (7.2-21), respectively. The cj0(k) are normally called
approximation and/or scaling coefficients; the dj (k) are referred to as detail
and/or wavelet coefficients. This is because the first sum in Eq. (7.3-1) uses scaling functions to provide an approximation of f(x) at scale j0 [unless f(x) H Vj0
so that the sum of the scaling functions is equal to f(x)]. For each higher scale
j Ú j0 in the second sum, a finer resolution function—a sum of wavelets—is
added to the approximation to provide increasing detail. If the expansion

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.3 ■ Wavelet Transforms in One Dimension

487

functions form an orthonormal basis or tight frame, which is often the case, the
expansion coefficients are calculated—based on Eqs. (7.2-5) and (7.2-9)—as
cj0(k) = 8f(x), wj0, k (x)9 =

L

f(x)wj0, k (x) dx

(7.3-2)

L

f(x)cj, k (x) dx

(7.3-3)

and
dj (k) = 8f(x), cj, k (x)9 =

Because f is real, no conjugates are needed in the
inner products of Eqs.
(7.3-2) and (7.3-3).

In Eqs. (7.2-5) and (7.2-9), the expansion coefficients (i.e., the ak) are defined
as inner products of the function being expanded and the expansion functions
being used. In Eqs. (7.3-2) and (7.3-3), the expansion functions are the wj0, k and
cj, k; the expansion coefficients are the cj0 and dj. If the expansion functions
are part of a biorthogonal basis, the w and c terms in these equations must be
'
'
replaced by their dual functions, w and c, respectively.

■ Consider the simple function
y = b

x2
0

EXAMPLE 7.7:
The Haar wavelet
series expansion
of y = x2.

0 … x … 1
otherwise

shown in Fig. 7.15(a). Using Haar wavelets—see Eqs. (7.2-14) and (7.2-30)—
and a starting scale j0 = 0, Eqs. (7.3-2) and (7.3-3) can be used to compute the
following expansion coefficients:
c0(0) =

1

1

x 2w0,0 (x) dx =

x2 dx =

L0

L0

1

d0(0) =

0.5

x2c0,0 (x) dx =

L0

L0

L0

L0.5

0.25

x2c1,0 (x) dx =

L0

x 2c1,1 (x) dx =

L0.5

x2 dx = -

1
4

0.5

x 2 12 dx 0.75

1

d1(1) =

1

x 2 dx -

L0

1

d1(0) =

x3 1
1
` =
3 0
3

x 2 12 dx = -

L0.25
1

x 2 12 dx -

x2 12 dx = -

L0.75

12
32

312
32

Substituting these values into Eq. (7.3-1), we get the wavelet series expansion
y =

1
12
1
312 c (x) + Á
d
w0,0(x) + c - c0,0(x) d + c c1,0(x) 1,1
3
4
32
32
¯˘˚
˙
¯˚
˚˘˚˙
¯˚˚˚˚
˚˚˘˚˚˚˚˚˚˙
W1
V0 ˚˚˚˘˚˚˚˚˙
W0
¯˚˚
V1 = V0 { W0
¯˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˘˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˚˙
V2 = V1 { W1 = V0 { W0 { W1

www.EBooksWorld.ir

488

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a b
c d
e f

1

1

y  x2

1/ 3 w0, 0

0.5

0.5
1/3

0

0

FIGURE 7.15

A wavelet series
expansion of
y = x2 using Haar
wavelets.

0.5

x
0

1

0.25

0.5

0.75

0.5

1

x
0

1

W0

0.5

V0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

V1

7/12

1/4 c0, 0

1/4
1/12

0
1/4
0.5
0

1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

x

0

x

1
37/48 V2

W1
 2/ 32 c1, 0

3 2/ 32 c1, 1
19/48
7/48
1/48

3/16
1/16
1/16
3/16
0

0.5

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

x

0.5
0

x

The first term in this expansion uses c0 (0) to generate a subspace V0 approximation of the function being expanded. This approximation is shown in Fig. 7.15(b)
and is the average value of the original function. The second term uses d0 (0) to
refine the approximation by adding a level of detail from subspace W0. The
added detail and resulting V1 approximation are shown in Figs. 7.15(c) and
(d), respectively. Another level of detail is added by the subspace W1 coefficients d1(0) and d1(1). This additional detail is shown in Fig. 7.15(e), and the
resulting V2 approximation is depicted in 7.15(f). Note that the expansion is
now beginning to resemble the original function. As higher scales (greater levels of detail) are added, the approximation becomes a more precise representation of the function, realizing it in the limit as j : q .
■

7.3.2 The Discrete Wavelet Transform
Like the Fourier series expansion, the wavelet series expansion of the previous
section maps a function of a continuous variable into a sequence of coefficients. If the function being expanded is discrete (i.e., a sequence of numbers),
the resulting coefficients are called the discrete wavelet transform (DWT). For
example, if f(n) = f(x0 + n ¢x) for some x0 , ¢x, and n = 0, 1, 2, Á , M - 1,

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.3 ■ Wavelet Transforms in One Dimension

489

the wavelet series expansion coefficients for f(x) [defined by Eqs. (7.3-2) and
(7.3-3)] become the forward DWT coefficients for sequence f(n):
1
f(n)wj0, k (n)
1M a
n
1
Wc (j, k) =
f(n)cj, k (n) for j Ú j0
1M a
n
Ww (j0, k) =

(7.3-5)
(7.3-6)

The wj0, k (n) and cj, k (n) in these equations are sampled versions of basis functions wj0, k (x) and cj, k (x). For example, wj0, k (n) = wj0, k (xS + n¢xs) for some
xs, ¢xs, and n = 0, 1, 2, Á , M - 1. Thus, we employ M equally spaced samples over the support of the basis functions (see Example 7.8 below). In accordance with Eq. (7.3-1), the complementary inverse DWT is
q

f(n) =

1
1
Ww (j0, k)wj0, k (n) +
a
a Wc (j, k)cj, k (n)
1M k
1 M ja
= j0 k

(7.3-7)

Normally, we let j0 = 0 and select M to be a power of 2 (i.e., M = 2J) so
that the summations in Eqs. (7.3-5) through (7.3-7) are performed over
n = 0, 1, 2, Á , M - 1, j = 0, 1, 2, Á , J - 1, and k = 0, 1, 2, Á , 2j - 1. For
Haar wavelets, the discretized scaling and wavelet functions employed in the
transform (i.e., the basis functions) correspond to the rows of the M * M
Haar transformation matrix of Section 7.1.3. The transform itself is composed
of M coefficients, the minimum scale is 0, and the maximum scale is J - 1. For
reasons noted in Section 7.3.1 and illustrated in Example 7.6, the coefficients
defined in Eqs. (7.3-5) and (7.3-6) are usually called approximation and detail
coefficients, respectively.
The Ww(j0, k) and Wc(j, k) in Eqs. (7.3-5) to (7.3-7) correspond to the
cj0(k) and dj (k) of the wavelet series expansion in the previous section. (This
change of variables is not necessary but paves the way for the standard notation used for the continuous wavelet transform of the next section.) Note that
the integrations in the series expansion have been replaced by summations,
and a 1> 1M normalizing factor, reminiscent of the DFT in Section 4.4.1, has
been added to both the forward and inverse expressions. This factor alternately could be incorporated into the forward or inverse alone as 1>M. Finally, it
should be remembered that Eqs. (7.3-5) through (7.3-7) are valid for orthonormal bases and tight frames alone. For biorthogonal bases, the w and c
'
'
terms in Eqs. (7.3-5) and (7.3-6) must be replaced by their duals, w and c,
respectively.

■ To illustrate the use of Eqs. (7.3-5) through (7.3-7), consider the discrete
function of four points: f(0) = 1, f(1) = 4, f(2) = -3, and f(3) = 0. Because
M = 4, J = 2 and, with j0 = 0, the summations are performed over
x = 0, 1, 2, 3, j = 0, 1, and k = 0 for j = 0 or k = 0, 1 for j = 1. We will use
the Haar scaling and wavelet functions and assume that the four samples of

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 7.8:
Computing a onedimensional
discrete wavelet
transform.

490

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

f(x) are distributed over the support of the basis functions, which is 1 in width.
Substituting the four samples into Eq. (7.3-5), we find that
1 3
f(n)w0, 0 (n)
2 na
=0
1
=
C1 # 1 + 4 # 1 - 3 # 1 + 0 # 1D = 1
2

Ww(0, 0) =

because w0, 0 (n) = 1 for n = 0, 1, 2, 3. Note that we have employed uniformly
spaced samples of the Haar scaling function for j = 0 and k = 0. The values
correspond to the first row of Haar transformation matrix H4 of Section 7.1.3.
Continuing with Eq. (7.3-6) and similarly spaced samples of cj, k (x), which correspond to rows 2, 3, and 4 of H4, we get
Wc(0, 0) =

1
C 1 # 1 + 4 # 1 - 3 # (-1) + 0 # (-1) D = 4
2

Wc(1, 0) =

1
C 1 # 12 + 4 # A - 12 B - 3 # 0 + 0 # 0 D = -1.5 12
2

Wc(1, 1) =

1
C 1 # 0 + 4 # 0 - 3 # 12 + 0 # A - 12 B D = -1.5 12
2

Thus, the discrete wavelet transform of our simple four-sample function relative to the Haar wavelet and scaling function is E 1, 4, -1.512, -1.512 F ,
where the transform coefficients have been arranged in the order in which
they were computed.
Equation (7.3-7) lets us reconstruct the original function from its transform.
Iterating through its summation indices, we get
f(n) =

1
C Ww (0, 0) w0, 0 (n) + Wc (0, 0)c0, 0 (n) + Wc (1, 0) c1, 0 (n)
2
+ Wc(1, 1)c1, 1 (n) D

for n = 0, 1, 2, 3. If n = 0, for instance,
f(0) =

1
C 1 # 1 + 4 # 1 - 1.512 # A 12 B - 1.512 # 0 D = 1
2

As in the forward case, uniformly spaced samples of the scaling and wavelet
functions are used in the computation of the inverse.
■
The four-point DWT in the preceding example is an illustration of a twoscale decomposition of f(n)—that is, j = 50, 16. The underlying assumption
was that starting scale j0 was zero, but other starting scales are possible. It is
left as an exercise for the reader (see Problem 7.16) to compute the singlescale transform E 2.512, -1.512, -1.512, -1.512 F , which results when the
starting scale is 1. Thus, Eqs. (7.3-5) and (7.3-6) define a “family” of transforms
that differ in starting scale j0.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.3 ■ Wavelet Transforms in One Dimension

7.3.3 The Continuous Wavelet Transform
The natural extension of the discrete wavelet transform is the continuous
wavelet transform (CWT), which transforms a continuous function into a highly
redundant function of two continuous variables—translation and scale. The resulting transform is easy to interpret and valuable for time-frequency analysis.
Although our interest is in discrete images, the continuous transform is covered here for completeness.
The continuous wavelet transform of a continuous, square-integrable function, f(x), relative to a real-valued wavelet, c(x), is defined as
q

Wc(s, t) =

L- q

f(x)cs,t(x) dx

(7.3-8)

where
cs,t(x) =

1
x - t
c¢
≤
s
1s

(7.3-9)

and s and t are called scale and translation parameters, respectively. Given
Wc(s, t), f(x) can be obtained using the inverse continuous wavelet transform
q

f(x) =

q

cs,t(x)
1
Wc(s, t)
dt ds
Cc L0 L- q
s2

(7.3-10)

where
q

Cc =

ƒ ° (m) ƒ 2
dm
L- q ƒ m ƒ

(7.3-11)

and °(m) is the Fourier transform of c(x). Equations (7.3-8) through (7.3-11)
define a reversible transformation as long as the so-called admissibility criterion,
Cc 6 q , is satisfied (Grossman and Morlet [1984]). In most cases, this simply means that °(0) = 0 and °(m) : 0 as m : q fast enough to make
Cc 6 q .
The preceding equations are reminiscent of their discrete counterparts—
Eqs. (7.2-19), (7.3-1), (7.3-3), (7.3-6), and (7.3-7). The following similarities
should be noted:
1. The continuous translation parameter, t, takes the place of the integer
translation parameter, k.
2. The continuous scale parameter, s, is inversely related to the binary scale
parameter, 2j. This is because s appears in the denominator of
c A (x - t)>s B in Eq. (7.3-9). Thus, wavelets used in continuous transforms
are compressed or reduced in width when 0 6 s 6 1 and dilated or expanded when s 7 1. Wavelet scale and our traditional notion of frequency
are inversely related.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

491

492

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

3. The continuous transform is similar to a series expansion [see Eq. (7.3-1)]
or discrete transform [see Eq. (7.3-6)] in which the starting scale
j0 = - q . This—in accordance with Eq. (7.2-26)—eliminates explicit scaling function dependence, so that the function is represented in terms of
wavelets alone.
4. Like the discrete transform, the continuous transform can be viewed as a
set of transform coefficients, E Wc(s, t) F , that measure the similarity of f(x)

with a set of basis functions, E cs,t(x) F . In the continuous case, however, both
sets are infinite. Because cs,t(x) is real valued and cs,t(x) = c*s,t(x), each

coefficient from Eq. (7.3-8) is the integral inner product, 8f(x), cs,t(x)9, of
f(x) and cs,t(x).
EXAMPLE 7.9:
A onedimensional
continuous
wavelet
transform.

■ The Mexican hat wavelet,
c(x) = ¢

2 -1>4
2
p
≤ (1 - x2)e -x >2
13

(7.3-12)

gets its name from its distinctive shape [see Fig. 7.16(a)]. It is proportional to
the second derivative of the Gaussian probability function, has an average
value of 0, and is compactly supported (i.e., dies out rapidly as ƒ x ƒ : q ). Although it satisfies the admissibility requirement for the existence of continuous,
reversible transforms, there is not an associated scaling function, and the computed transform does not result in an orthogonal analysis. Its most distinguishing features are its symmetry and the existence of the explicit expression of
Eq. (7.3-12).
The continuous, one-dimensional function in Fig. 7.16(a) is the sum of two
Mexican hat wavelets:
f(x) = c1, 10 (x) + c6, 80 (x)
Its Fourier spectrum, shown in Fig. 7.16(b), reveals the close connection between scaled wavelets and Fourier frequency bands. The spectrum contains
two broad frequency bands (or peaks) that correspond to the two Gaussianlike perturbations of the function.
Figure 7.16(c) shows a portion (1 … s … 10 and t … 100) of the CWT of
the function in Fig. 7.16(a) relative to the Mexican hat wavelet. Unlike the
Fourier spectrum in Fig. 7.16(b), it provides both spatial and frequency information. Note, for example, that when s = 1, the transform achieves a maximum at t = 10, which corresponds to the location of the c1, 10 (x) component
of f(x). Because the transform provides an objective measure of the similarity
between f(x) and the wavelets for which it is computed, it is easy to see how it
can be used for feature detection. We simply need wavelets that match the features of interest. Similar observations can be drawn from the intensity plot in
Fig. 7.16(d), where the absolute value of the transform ƒ Wc(s, t) ƒ is displayed
as intensities between black and white. Note that the continuous wavelet
transform turns a 1-D function into a 2-D result.
■
www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.4 ■ The Fast Wavelet Transform

a b
c d

F(m)

f(x)
1

493

0.035

FIGURE 7.16

0.03

The continuous
wavelet transform
(c and d) and
Fourier spectrum
(b) of a
continuous 1-D
function (a).

0

0.005
0.4
0

10

80

100

x

0

m

0

20

Wc(s, t)
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
10

s
10

8
6

s

4
2
0

7.4

0

40

20

80

60

t

100

1

0

10

t

80

100

The Fast Wavelet Transform

The fast wavelet transform (FWT) is a computationally efficient implementation of the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) that exploits a surprising but
fortunate relationship between the coefficients of the DWT at adjacent scales.
Also called Mallat’s herringbone algorithm (Mallat [1989a, 1989b]), the FWT
resembles the two-band subband coding scheme of Section 7.1.2.
Consider again the multiresolution refinement equation
w(x) = a hw(n) 12w (2x - n)

(7.4-1)

n

j

Scaling x by 2 , translating it by k, and letting m = 2k + n gives
w(2 jx - k) = a hw(n)12w A 2(2 jx - k) - n B
n

= a hw(n)12w (2 j + 1x - 2k - n)
m

= a hw(m - 2k)12w (2 j + 1x - m)
m

www.EBooksWorld.ir

(7.4-2)

Equation (7.4-1) is Eq.
(7.2-18) of Section 7.2.2.

494

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

Note that scaling vector hw can be thought of as the “weights” used to expand
w(2jx - k) as a sum of scale j + 1 scaling functions. A similar sequence of
operations—beginning with Eq. (7.2-28)—provides an analogous result for
c(2jx - k). That is,
c(2 jx - k) = a hc(m - 2k)12w(2 j + 1x - m)

(7.4-3)

m

The wavelet series
expansion coefficients
become the DWT
coefficient when f is
discrete. Here, we begin
with the series expansion
coefficients to simplify
the derivation; we will be
able to substitute freely
from earlier results (like
the scaling and wavelet
function definitions).

where scaling vector hw(n) in Eq. (7.4-2) corresponds to wavelet vector hc(n)
in Eq. (7.4-3).
Now consider Eqs. (7.3-2) and (7.3-3) of Section 7.3.1. They define the
wavelet series expansion coefficients of continuous function f(x). Substituting
Eq. (7.2-19)—the wavelet defining equation—into Eq. (7.3-3), we get
dj (k) =

L

f(x)2 j>2 c(2 jx - k) dx

(7.4-4)

which, upon replacing c(2jx - k) with the right side of Eq. (7.4-3), becomes

dj (k) =

L

f(x)2 j>2 B a hc(m - 2k)12w(2 j + 1x - m) R dx

(7.4-5)

m

Interchanging the sum and integral and rearranging terms then gives
dj (k) = a hc(m - 2k) B
m

L

f(x)2 (j + 1)>2 w(2 j + 1x - m) R

(7.4-6)

where the bracketed quantity is cj0(k) of Eq. (7.3-2) with j0 = j + 1 and
k = m. To see this, substitute Eq. (7.2-10) into Eq. (7.3-2) and replace j0 and k
with j + 1 and m, respectively. Therefore, we can write
dj (k) = a hc(m - 2k)cj + 1(m)

(7.4-7)

m

and note that the detail coefficients at scale j are a function of the approximation coefficients at scale j + 1. Using Eqs. (7.4-2) and (7.3-2) as the starting
point of a similar derivation involving the wavelet series expansion (and
DWT) approximation coefficients, we find similarly that
cj (k) = a hw(m - 2k)cj + 1(m)

(7.4-8)

m

Because the cj (k) and dj (k) coefficients of the wavelet series expansion become the Ww(j, k) and Wc(j, k) coefficients of the DWT when f(x) is discrete
(see Section 7.3.2), we can write

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.4 ■ The Fast Wavelet Transform

Wc(j, k) = a hc(m - 2k)Ww(j + 1, m)

(7.4-9)

Ww(j, k) = a hw(m - 2k)Ww(j + 1, m)

(7.4-10)

495

m

m

Equations (7.4-9) and (7.4-10) reveal a remarkable relationship between
the DWT coefficients of adjacent scales. Comparing these results to Eq. (7.1-7),
we see that both Ww(j, k) and Wc(j, k), the scale j approximation and the detail coefficients, can be computed by convolving Ww(j + 1, k), the scale j + 1
approximation coefficients, with the order-reversed scaling and wavelet vectors, hw(-n) and hc(-n), and subsampling the results. Figure 7.17 summarizes
these operations in block diagram form. Note that this diagram is identical to
the analysis portion of the two-band subband coding and decoding system of
Fig. 7.6, with h0 (n) = hw(-n) and h1(n) = hc(-n). Therefore, we can write
Wc(j, k) = hc(-n)  Ww(j + 1, n) `

(7.4-11)
n = 2k, k Ú 0

and
Ww(j, k) = hw(-n)  Ww(j + 1, n) `

(7.4-12)

If hw(m - 2k) in
Eq. (7.4-9) is rewritten as
hw(-(2k - m)), we see
that the first minus sign
is responsible for the
order reversal [see
Eq. (7.1-6)], the 2k is
responsible for the
subsampling [see Eq.
(7.1-2)], and m is the
dummy variable for
convolution [see
Eq. (7.1-7)].

n = 2k, k Ú 0

where the convolutions are evaluated at instants n = 2k for k Ú 0. As will be
shown in Example 7.10, evaluating convolutions at nonnegative, even indices
is equivalent to filtering and downsampling by 2.
Equations (7.4-11) and (7.4-12) are the defining equations for the computation of the fast wavelet transform. For a sequence of length M = 2J, the number of mathematical operations involved is on the order of O(M). That is, the
number of multiplications and additions is linear with respect to the length of
the input sequence—because the number of multiplications and additions involved in the convolutions performed by the FWT analysis bank in Fig. 7.17 is
proportional to the length of the sequences being convolved. Thus, the FWT
compares favorably with the FFT algorithm, which requires on the order of
O(M log2 M) operations.
To conclude the development of the FWT, we simply note that the filter
bank in Fig. 7.17 can be “iterated” to create multistage structures for computing
DWT coefficients at two or more successive scales. For example, Fig. 7.18(a)
shows a two-stage filter bank for generating the coefficients at the two highest
scales of the transform. Note that the highest scale coefficients are assumed to
be samples of the function itself. That is, Ww(J, n) = f(n), where J is the highest
 hc(n)

2T

Wc(j, n)

 hw(n)

2T

Ww(j, n)

Ww( j  1, n)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

FIGURE 7.17

An FWT analysis
bank.

496

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a
b
FIGURE 7.18

(a) A two-stage or
two-scale FWT
analysis bank and
(b) its frequency
splitting
characteristics.

 hc(n)

Wc(J  1, n)

2T

f (n) 
Ww(J, n)

 hc(n)
 hw(n)

2T

Wc(J  2, n)

2T

Ww(J  2, n)

Ww(J  1, n)

2T

 hw(n)

|H(v)|
VJ
VJ 1

VJ 2

0

WJ 2

p/4

WJ 1

p/2

p

v

scale. [In accordance with Section 7.2.2, f(x) H VJ, where VJ is the scaling
space in which f(x) resides.] The first filter bank in Fig. 7.18(a) splits the original function into a lowpass, approximation component, which corresponds to
scaling coefficients Ww(J - 1, n); and a highpass, detail component, corresponding to coefficients Wc(J - 1, n). This is illustrated graphically in Fig. 7.18(b),
where scaling space VJ is split into wavelet subspace WJ - 1 and scaling subspace
VJ - 1. The spectrum of the original function is split into two half-band components. The second filter bank of Fig. 7.18(a) splits the spectrum and subspace
VJ - 1, the lower half-band, into quarter-band subspaces WJ - 2 and VJ - 2 with
corresponding DWT coefficients Wc(J - 2, n) and Ww(J - 2, n), respectively.
The two-stage filter bank of Fig. 7.18(a) is extended easily to any number of
scales. A third filter bank, for example, would operate on the Ww(J - 2, n) coefficients, splitting scaling space VJ - 2 into two eighth-band subspaces WJ - 3
and VJ - 3. Normally, we choose 2J samples of f(x) and employ P filter banks
(as in Fig. 7.17) to generate a P-scale FWT at scales J - 1, J - 2, Á , J - P.
The highest scale (i.e., J - 1) coefficients are computed first; the lowest scale
(i.e., J - P) last. If function f(x) is sampled above the Nyquist rate, as is usually the case, its samples are good approximations of the scaling coefficients at
the sampling resolution and can be used as the starting high-resolution scaling
coefficient inputs. In other words, no wavelet or detail coefficients are needed
at the sampling scale. The highest-resolution scaling functions act as unit discrete impulse functions in Eqs. (7.3-5) and (7.3-6), allowing f(n) to be used as
the scaling (approximation) input to the first two-band filter bank (Odegard,
Gopinath, and Burrus [1992]).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.4 ■ The Fast Wavelet Transform

■ To illustrate the preceding concepts, consider the discrete function f(n)

= 51, 4, -3, 06 from Example 7.8. As in that example, we will compute the
transform based on Haar scaling and wavelet functions. Here, however, we will
not use the basis functions directly, as was done in the DWT of Example 7.8.
Instead, we will use the corresponding scaling and wavelet vectors from
Examples 7.5 and 7.6:
1> 12
0

n = 0, 1
otherwise

(7.4-13)

1> 12
hc(n) = c -1> 12
0

n = 0
n = 1
otherwise

(7.4-14)

hw(n) = b

497

EXAMPLE 7.10:
Computing a 1-D
fast wavelet
transform.

and

These are the functions used to build the FWT filter banks; they provide the filter
coefficients. Note that because Haar scaling and wavelet functions are orthonormal, Eq. (7.1-14) can be used to generate the FWT filter coefficients from a single
prototype filter—like hw(n) in Table 7.2, which corresponds to g0(n) in Eq. (7.1-14):
Since the DWT computed in Example 7.8 was composed of elements
E Ww(0, 0), Wc(0, 0), Wc(1, 0), Wc(1, 1) F , we will compute the corresponding
two-scale FWT for scales j = 50, 16. That is, J = 2 (there are 2J = 22 samples) and P = 2 (we are working with scales J - 1 = 2 - 1 = 1 and
J - P = 2 - 2 = 0 in that order). The transform will be computed using the
two-stage filter bank of Fig. 7.18(a). Figure 7.19 shows the sequences that result from the required FWT convolutions and downsamplings. Note that function f(n) itself is the scaling (approximation) input to the leftmost filter bank.
To compute the Wc(1, k) coefficients that appear at the end of the upper
branch of Fig. 7.19, for example, we first convolve f(n) with hc(-n). As explained in Section 3.4.2, this requires flipping one of the functions about the origin, sliding it past the other, and computing the sum of the point-wise product of
the two functions. For sequences 51, 4, -3, 06 and E -1> 12, 1> 12 F , this
produces

E -1> 12, -3> 12, 7> 12, -3> 12, 0 F
where the second term corresponds to index k = 2n = 0. (In Fig. 7.19, underlined values represent negative indices, i.e., n 6 0.) When downsampled by
n

hW(n)

0
1

1> 12
1> 12

www.EBooksWorld.ir

TABLE 7.2
Orthonormal
Haar filter
coefficients for
hw(n).

498

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing
{1/ 2, 3/ 2, 7/ 2, 3/ 2, 0}

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2 }

Ww(2, n)  f(n)
 {1, 4, 3, 0}

Wc(1, n)  {3/ 2, 3/ 2 }

2T

Ww(I, n)  {5/ 2, 3/ 2 }

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2}

2T

Wc(0, 0)  {4}

{2.5, 4, 1.5}
 {1/ 2, 1/ 2 }

2T

{1/ 2, 5/ 2, 1/ 2, 3/ 2, 0}

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2 }

2T

Ww(0, 0)  {1}

{2.5, 1, 1.5}

FIGURE 7.19 Computing a two-scale fast wavelet transform of sequence 51, 4, -3, 06 using Haar scaling and

wavelet vectors.

taking the even-indexed points, we get Wc(1, k) = E -3> 12, -3> 12 F for
k = 50, 16. Alternatively, we can use Eq. (7.4-12) to compute
Wc(1, k) = hc(-n)  Ww(2, n) `

= hc(-n)  f(n) `
n = 2k, k Ú 0

= a hc(l - 2k)x(l) `
l

=

n = 2k, k Ú 0

k = 0, 1

1
1
x(2k) x(2k + 1) `
12
12
k = 0, 1

Here, we have substituted 2k for n in the convolution and employed l as a dummy
variable of convolution (i.e., for displacing the two sequences relative to one
another). There are only two terms in the expanded sum because there are only
two nonzero values in the order-reversed wavelet vector hc(-n). Substituting
k = 0, we find that Wc(1, 0) = -3> 12; for k = 1, we get Wc(1, 1) = -3> 12.
Thus, the filtered and downsampled sequence is E -3> 12, -3> 12 F , which matches the earlier result. The remaining convolutions and downsamplings are performed in a similar manner.
■
As one might expect, a fast inverse transform for the reconstruction of f(n)
from the results of the forward transform can be formulated. Called the
inverse fast wavelet transform (FWT -1), it uses the scaling and wavelet vectors
employed in the forward transform, together with the level j approximation
www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.4 ■ The Fast Wavelet Transform
Wc( j, n)

2c

FIGURE 7.20

 hc(n)



Ww( j, n)

2c

499

The FWT -1
synthesis filter
bank.

WW( j  1, n)

 hw(n)

and detail coefficients, to generate the level j + 1 approximation coefficients.
Noting the similarity between the FWT analysis bank in Fig. 7.17 and the twoband subband analysis portion of Fig. 7.6(a), we can immediately postulate the
required FWT-1 synthesis filter bank. Figure 7.20 details its structure, which is
identical to the synthesis portion of the two-band subband coding and decoding system in Fig. 7.6(a). Equation (7.1-14) of Section 7.1.2 defines the relevant
synthesis filters. As noted there, perfect reconstruction (for two-band orthonormal filters) requires gi (n) = hi (-n) for i = 50, 16. That is, the synthesis
and analysis filters must be order-reversed versions of one another. Since the
FWT analysis filters (see Fig. 7.17) are h0(n) = hw(-n) and h1(n) = hc(-n),
the required FWT -1 synthesis filters are g0(n) = h0(-n) = hw(n) and g1(n)
= h1(-n) = hc(n). It should be remembered, however, that it is possible also
to use biorthogonal analysis and synthesis filters, which are not order-reversed
versions of one another. Biorthogonal analysis and synthesis filters are crossmodulated per Eqs. (7.1-10) and (7.1-11).
The FWT -1 filter bank in Fig. 7.20 implements the computation
Ww(j + 1, k) = hw(k)  Ww2 c (j, k) + hc(k)  Wc2 c (j, k) `

(7.4-15)
kÚ0

where W 2 c signifies upsampling by 2 [i.e., inserting zeros in W as defined by
Eq. (7.1-1) so that it is twice its original length]. The upsampled coefficients are
filtered by convolution with hw(n) and hc(n) and added to generate a higher
scale approximation. In essence, a better approximation of sequence f(n) with
greater detail and resolution is created. As with the forward FWT, the inverse
filter bank can be iterated as shown in Fig. 7.21, where a two-scale structure for
computing the final two scales of a FWT -1 reconstruction is depicted. This coefficient combining process can be extended to any number of scales and guarantees perfect reconstruction of sequence f(n).

Wc(J  1, n)

Wc(J  2, n)

2c

2c


Ww(J  1, n)


Ww(J  2, n)

2c

FIGURE 7.21

 hc(n)

 hc(n)

2c

 hw(n)

 hw(n)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Remember that like in
pyramid coding (see
Section 7.1.1), wavelet
transforms can be computed at a user-specified
number of scales. For a
2J * 2J image, for example, there are 1 + log2 J
possible scales.

A two-stage or
two-scale FWT -1
synthesis bank.
Ww(J, n)

500

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

■ Computation of the inverse fast wavelet transform mirrors its forward counterpart. Figure 7.22 illustrates the process for the sequence considered in Example
7.10.To begin the calculation, the level 0 approximation and detail coefficients are
upsampled to yield 51, 06 and 54, 06, respectively. Convolution with filters
g0(n) = hw(n) = E 1> 12, 1> 12 F
and
g1(n) = hc(n) = E 1> 12, -1> 12 F

EXAMPLE 7.11:
Computing a 1-D
inverse fast
wavelet
transform.

produces E 1> 12, 1> 12, 0 F and E 4> 12, -4> 12, 0 F , which when added give

Ww(1, n) = E 5> 12, -3> 12 F . Thus, the level 1 approximation of Fig. 7.22, which
matches the computed approximation in Fig. 7.19, is reconstructed. Continuing in
this manner, f(n) is formed at the right of the second synthesis filter bank.
■

We conclude our discussion of the fast wavelet transform by noting that
while the Fourier basis functions (i.e., sinusoids) guarantee the existence of the
FFT, the existence of the FWT depends upon the availability of a scaling function for the wavelets being used, as well as the orthogonality (or biorthogonality) of the scaling function and corresponding wavelets. Thus, the Mexican hat
wavelet of Eq. (7.3-12), which does not have a companion scaling function,
cannot be used in the computation of the FWT. In other words, we cannot construct a filter bank like that of Fig. 7.17 for the Mexican hat wavelet; it does not
satisfy the underlying assumptions of the FWT approach.
Finally, we note that while time and frequency usually are viewed as different
domains when representing functions, they are inextricably linked. When you
try to analyze a function simultaneously in time and frequency, you run into the
following problem: If you want precise information about time, you must accept
some vagueness about frequency, and vice versa. This is the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle applied to information processing. To illustrate the principle graphically, each basis function used in the representation of a function can
be viewed schematically as a tile in a time-frequency plane. The tile, also called a
Heisenberg cell or Heisenberg box, shows the frequency content of the basis
function that it represents and where the basis function resides in time. Basis
functions that are orthonormal are characterized by nonoverlapping tiles.
Figure 7.23 shows the time-frequency tiles for (a) an impulse function (i.e.,
conventional time domain) basis, (b) a sinusoidal (FFT) basis, and (c) an FWT
{3/ 2, 0, 3/ 2, 0}
Wc(1, n)  {3/ 2, 3/ 2 }
{4, 0}

2c

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2 }

{4/ 2, 4/ 2, 0}
Wc(0, 0)  {4}

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2 }

2c

Ww(1, n)  {5/ 2, 3/ 2 }


Ww(0, 0)  {1}

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2}

2c

2c

 {1/ 2, 1/ 2 }

{1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 0}



f (n)  Ww(2, n)
 {1, 4, 3, 0}

{2.5, 2.5, 1.5,1.5, 0}

{5/ 2, 0, 3/ 2, 0}
{1/ 2, 1/ 2, 0}

{1, 0}

FIGURE 7.22 Computing a two-scale inverse fast wavelet transform of sequence E 1, 4, -1.512, -1.512 F

with Haar scaling and wavelet functions.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

Frequency

7.5 ■ Wavelet Transforms in Two Dimensions

Time

Time

Time

a b c
FIGURE 7.23 Time-frequency tilings for the basis functions associated with (a) sampled

data, (b) the FFT, and (c) the FWT. Note that the horizontal strips of equal height
rectangles in (c) represent FWT scales.

basis. Each tile is a rectangular region in Figs. 7.23(a) through (c); the height
and width of the region defines the frequency and time characteristics of the
functions that can be represented using the basis function. Note that the standard time domain basis in Fig. 7.23(a) pinpoints the instants when events occur
but provides no frequency information [the width of each rectangle in Fig. 7.23(a)
should be considered one instant in time]. Thus, to represent a single frequency
sinusoid as an expansion using impulse basis functions, every basis function is
required. The sinusoidal basis in Fig. 7.23(b), on the other hand, pinpoints the
frequencies that are present in events that occur over long periods but provides no time resolution [the height of each rectangle in Fig. 7.23(b) should be
considered a single frequency]. Thus, the single frequency sinusoid that was
represented by an infinite number of impulse basis functions can be represented
as an expansion involving one sinusoidal basis function. The time and frequency
resolution of the FWT tiles in Fig. 7.23(c) vary, but the area of each tile (rectangle) is the same.At low frequencies, the tiles are shorter (i.e., have better frequency resolution or less ambiguity regarding frequency) but are wider (which
corresponds to poorer time resolution or more ambiguity regarding time). At
high frequencies, tile width is smaller (so the time resolution is improved) and
tile height is greater (which means the frequency resolution is poorer). Thus,
the FWT basis functions provide a compromise between the two limiting cases
in Fig. 7.23(a) and (b). This fundamental difference between the FFT and FWT
was noted in the introduction to the chapter and is important in the analysis of
nonstationary functions whose frequencies vary in time.

7.5

Wavelet Transforms in Two Dimensions

The one-dimensional transforms of the previous sections are easily extended to
two-dimensional functions like images. In two dimensions, a two-dimensional
scaling function, w(x, y), and three two-dimensional wavelets, c H(x, y),
cV(x, y), and cD(x, y), are required. Each is the product of two onedimensional functions. Excluding products that produce one-dimensional results,
like w(x)c(x), the four remaining products produce the separable scaling function
w(x, y) = w(x)w(y)
www.EBooksWorld.ir

(7.5-1)

501

502

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

and separable, “directionally sensitive” wavelets
cH(x, y) = c(x)w(y)

(7.5-2)

cV(x, y) = w(x)c(y)

(7.5-3)

D

c (x, y) = c(x)c(y)

(7.5-4)

These wavelets measure functional variations—intensity variations for images—
along different directions: cH measures variations along columns (for example, horizontal edges), cV responds to variations along rows (like vertical
edges), and cD corresponds to variations along diagonals. The directional sensitivity is a natural consequence of the separability in Eqs. (7.5-2) to (7.5-4); it
does not increase the computational complexity of the 2-D transform discussed in this section.
Given separable two-dimensional scaling and wavelet functions, extension
of the 1-D DWT to two dimensions is straightforward. We first define the
scaled and translated basis functions:
wj, m, n(x, y) = 2 j>2w(2 jx - m, 2 jy - n)
cij, m, n(x, y) = 2 j>2ci(2 jx - m, 2 jy - n),

Now that we are dealing
with 2-D images, f(x, y)
is a discrete function or
sequence of values and x
and y are discrete
variables. The scaling and
wavelet functions in
Eq. (7.5-7) and (7.5-8)
are sampled over their
support (as was done in
the 1-D case in
Section 7.3.2).

(7.5-5)
i = 5H, V, D6

(7.5-6)

where index i identifies the directional wavelets in Eqs. (7.5-2) to (7.5-4).
Rather than an exponent, i is a superscript that assumes the values H, V, and
D. The discrete wavelet transform of image f(x, y) of size M * N is then
Ww(j0 , m, n) =

1 M-1 N-1
a f(x, y)wj0, m, n (x, y)
1MN xa
=0 y=0

(7.5-7)

Wci (j, m, n) =

1 M-1 N-1
i
a f(x, y)cj, m, n (x, y), i = 5H, V, D6
1MN xa
=0 y=0

(7.5-8)

As in the one-dimensional case, j0 is an arbitrary starting scale and the
Ww(j0 , m, n) coefficients define an approximation of f(x, y) at scale j0. The
Wci (j, m, n) coefficients add horizontal, vertical, and diagonal details for scales
j Ú j0. We normally let j0 = 0 and select N = M = 2 J so that j = 0, 1, 2, Á ,
J - 1 and m = n = 0, 1, 2, Á , 2 j - 1. Given the Ww and Wic of Eqs. (7.5-7) and
(7.5-8), f(x, y) is obtained via the inverse discrete wavelet transform
f(x, y) =

1
a Ww(j0, m, n)wj0, m, n(x, y)
1MN a
m n
q
1
i
i
+
a a a W c(j, m, n)cj, m, n (x, y)
1MN i =a
H,V,D j = j0 m n

(7.5-9)

Like the 1-D discrete wavelet transform, the 2-D DWT can be implemented
using digital filters and downsamplers. With separable two-dimensional scaling
and wavelet functions, we simply take the 1-D FWT of the rows of f(x, y), followed by the 1-D FWT of the resulting columns. Figure 7.24(a) shows the

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.5 ■ Wavelet Transforms in Two Dimensions
 hc(m)
 hc(n)

D

2T

Wc (j, m, n)

Rows
(along m)

2T
Columns
(along n)

 hw(m)

V

2T

Wc(j, m, n)

Rows

Ww(j  1, m, n)
 hc(m)

H

2T

Wc (j, m, n)

Rows
 hw(n)

2T
Columns
 hw(m)

Ww(j, m, n)

2T
Rows

H

Ww( j, m, n) Wc ( j, m, n)
Ww( j  1, m, n)
V

D

Wc( j, m, n) Wc ( j, m, n)

D

Wc (j, m, n)

2c

 hc(m)

Rows
(along m)
V

Wc(j, m, n)

2c



2c

 hc(n)

Columns
(along n)

 hw(m)

Rows
H

Wc (j, m, n)

2c



Ww(j  1, m, n)

 hc(m)

Rows


2c

 hw(n)

Columns
Ww(j, m, n)

2c

 hw(m)

Rows

a
b
c
FIGURE 7.24 The 2-D fast wavelet transform: (a) the analysis filter bank; (b) the

resulting decomposition; and (c) the synthesis filter bank.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

503

504

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

V
Note how Ww, WH
c , Wc ,
and WD
c are arranged in
Fig. 7.24(b). For each
scale that is computed,
they replace the previous
scale approximation on
which they were based.

EXAMPLE 7.12:
Computing a 2-D
fast wavelet
transform.

The scaling and wavelet
vectors used in this
example are described
later. Our focus here is
on the mechanics of the
transform computation,
which are independent of
the filter coefficients
employed.

process in block diagram form. Note that, like its one-dimensional counterpart
in Fig. 7.17, the 2-D FWT “filters” the scale j + 1 approximation coefficients
to construct the scale j approximation and detail coefficients. In the twodimensional case, however, we get three sets of detail coefficients—the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal details.
The single-scale filter bank of Fig. 7.24(a) can be “iterated” (by tying the approximation output to the input of another filter bank) to produce a P scale
transform in which scale j is equal to J - 1, J - 2, Á , J - P. As in the onedimensional case, image f(x, y) is used as the Ww(J, m, n) input. Convolving
its rows with hw( -n) and hc(-n) and downsampling its columns, we get two
subimages whose horizontal resolutions are reduced by a factor of 2. The highpass or detail component characterizes the image’s high-frequency information with vertical orientation; the lowpass, approximation component contains
its low-frequency, vertical information. Both subimages are then filtered
columnwise and downsampled to yield four quarter-size output subimages—
V
D
Ww, W H
c , W c , and W c . These subimages, which are shown in the middle of
Fig. 7.24(b), are the inner products of f(x, y) and the two-dimensional scaling
and wavelet functions in Eqs. (7.5-1) through (7.5-4), followed by downsampling by two in each dimension. Two iterations of the filtering process produces the two-scale decomposition at the far right of Fig. 7.24(b).
Figure 7.24(c) shows the synthesis filter bank that reverses the process just
described. As would be expected, the reconstruction algorithm is similar to the
one-dimensional case. At each iteration, four scale j approximation and detail
subimages are upsampled and convolved with two one-dimensional filters—
one operating on the subimages’ columns and the other on its rows. Addition
of the results yields the scale j + 1 approximation, and the process is repeated
until the original image is reconstructed.

■ Figure 7.25(a) is a 128 * 128 computer-generated image consisting of 2-D
sine-like pulses on a black background. The objective of this example is to
illustrate the mechanics involved in computing the 2-D FWT of this image.
Figures 7.25(b) through (d) show three FWTs of the image in Fig. 7.25(a). The
2-D filter bank of Fig. 7.24(a) and the decomposition filters shown in Figs. 7.26(a)
and (b) were used to generate all three results.
Figure 7.25(b) shows the one-scale FWT of the image in Fig. 7.25(a). To
compute this transform, the original image was used as the input to the filter
bank of Fig. 7.24(a). The four resulting quarter-size decomposition outputs (i.e.,
the approximation and horizontal, vertical, and diagonal details) were then
arranged in accordance with Fig. 7.24(b) to produce the image in Fig. 7.25(b). A
similar process was used to generate the two-scale FWT in Fig. 7.25(c), but the
input to the filter bank was changed to the quarter-size approximation subimage from the upper-left-hand corner of Fig. 7.25(b). As can be seen in Fig.
7.25(c), that quarter-size subimage was then replaced by the four quarter-size

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.5 ■ Wavelet Transforms in Two Dimensions

505

a b
c d
FIGURE 7.25

Computing a 2-D
three-scale FWT:
(a) the original
image; (b) a onescale FWT; (c) a
two-scale FWT;
and (d) a threescale FWT.

(now 1 > 16th of the size of the original image) decomposition results that were
generated in the second filtering pass. Finally, Fig. 7.25(d) is the three-scale
FWT that resulted when the subimage from the upper-left-hand corner of Fig.
7.25(c) was used as the filter bank input. Each pass through the filter bank produced four quarter-size output images that were substituted for the input from
which they were derived. Note the directional nature of the wavelet-based
V
D
subimages, WH
■
c , Wc , and Wc , at each scale.
The decomposition filters used in the preceding example are part of a wellknown family of wavelets called symlets, short for “symmetrical wavelets.” Although they are not perfectly symmetrical, they are designed to have the least
asymmetry and highest number of vanishing moments† for a given compact
support (Daubechies [1992]). Figures 7.26(e) and (f) show the fourth-order

†

The kth moment of wavelet c(x) is m(k) = 1 xkc(x) dx. Zero moments impact the smoothness of the
scaling and wavelet functions and our ability to represent them as polynomials. An order-N symlet has
N vanishing moments.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

Recall that the compact
support of a function is
the interval in which the
function has non-zero
values.

506

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a b
c d
e f
g

h0(n)  hw(n)
1.2

FIGURE 7.26

0.6

Fourth-order
symlets: (a)–(b)
decomposition
filters; (c)–(d)
reconstruction
filters; (e) the
one-dimensional
wavelet; (f) the
one-dimensional
scaling function;
and (g) one of
three twodimensional
wavelets, cV(x, y).
See Table 7.3 for
the values of
hw(n) for
0 … n … 7.

h1(n)  h c (n)
0.5

1
0.8

0

0.4

0.5

0.2
0
0.2

0

2

4

6

8

n

1

0

2

4

6

8

4

6

8

n

g1(n)  h c (n)
0.5

g0(n)  hw(n)
1.2
1
0.8

0

0.6
0.4

0.5

0.2
0
0.2

0

2

4

6

8

n

c(x)
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

x

1

0

w(x)
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0 1

2

2

3

4

5

6

n

x

7

c(x) w( y)
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5
1

8

6
y

4

2

0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

2

4

6
x

8

7.5 ■ Wavelet Transforms in Two Dimensions
n

hW(n)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.0322
-0.0126
-0.0992
0.2979
0.8037
0.4976
-0.0296
-0.0758

507

TABLE 7.3
Orthonormal
fourth-order
symlet filter
coefficients for
hw(n).
(Daubechies
[1992].)

1-D symlets (i.e., wavelet and scaling functions). Figures 7.26(a) through (d)
show the corresponding decomposition and reconstruction filters. The coefficients of lowpass reconstruction filter g0(n) = hw(n) for 0 … n … 7 are
given in Table 7.3. The coefficients of the remaining orthonormal filters are
obtained using Eq. (7.1-14). Figure 7.26(g), a low-resolution graphic depiction
of wavelet cV(x, y), is provided as an illustration of how a one-dimensional
scaling and wavelet function can combine to form a separable, two-dimensional
wavelet.
We conclude this section with two examples that demonstrate the usefulness of wavelets in image processing. As in the Fourier domain, the basic approach is to
Step 1. Compute a 2-D wavelet transform of an image.
Step 2. Alter the transform.
Step 3. Compute the inverse transform.
Because the DWT’s scaling and wavelet vectors are used as lowpass and highpass filters, most Fourier-based filtering techniques have an equivalent
“wavelet domain” counterpart.

■ Figure 7.27 provides a simple illustration of the preceding three steps. In
Fig. 7.27(a), the lowest scale approximation component of the discrete wavelet
transform shown in Fig. 7.25(c) has been eliminated by setting its values to
zero. As Fig. 7.27(b) shows, the net effect of computing the inverse wavelet
transform using these modified coefficients is edge enhancement, reminiscent
of the Fourier-based image sharpening results discussed in Section 4.9. Note
how well the transitions between signal and background are delineated, despite the fact that they are relatively soft, sinusoidal transitions. By zeroing the
horizontal details as well—see Figs. 7.27(c) and (d)—we can isolate the verti■
cal edges.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 7.13:
Wavelet-based
edge detection.

508

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a b
c d
FIGURE 7.27

Modifying a DWT
for edge
detection: (a) and
(c) two-scale
decompositions
with selected
coefficients
deleted; (b) and
(d) the
corresponding
reconstructions.

EXAMPLE 7.14:
Wavelet-based
noise removal.

■ As a second example, consider the CT image of a human head shown in
Fig. 7.28(a). As can be seen in the background, the image has been uniformly
corrupted with additive white noise. A general wavelet-based procedure for
denoising the image (i.e., suppressing the noise part) is as follows:
Step 1. Choose a wavelet (e.g. Haar, symlet, Á ) and number of levels
(scales), P, for the decomposition. Then compute the FWT of the noisy
image.
Step 2. Threshold the detail coefficients. That is, select and apply a threshold to the detail coefficients from scales J - 1 to J - P. This can be accomplished by hard thresholding, which means setting to zero the elements
whose absolute values are lower than the threshold, or by soft thresholding, which involves first setting to zero the elements whose absolute values
are lower than the threshold and then scaling the nonzero coefficients toward zero. Soft thresholding eliminates the discontinuity (at the threshold)
that is inherent in hard thresholding. (See Chapter 10 for a discussion of
thresholding.)
Step 3. Compute the inverse wavelet transform (i.e., perform a wavelet reconstruction) using the original approximation coefficients at level J - P and the
modified detail coefficients for levels J - 1 to J - P.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.5 ■ Wavelet Transforms in Two Dimensions

509

a b
c d
e f
FIGURE 7.28

Modifying a DWT
for noise removal:
(a) a noisy CT of a
human head; (b),
(c) and (e) various
reconstructions
after thresholding
the detail
coefficients;
(d) and (f) the
information
removed during
the reconstruction
of (c) and (e).
(Original image
courtesy
Vanderbilt
University
Medical Center.)

Figure 7.28(b) shows the result of performing these operations with fourthorder symlets, two scales (i.e., P = 2), and a global threshold that was determined interactively. Note the reduction in noise and blurring of image
edges. This loss of edge detail is reduced significantly in Fig. 7.28(c), which

www.EBooksWorld.ir

510

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

Because only the highest
resolution detail
coefficients were kept
when generating
Fig. 7.28(d), the inverse
transform is their contribution to the image. In
the same way, Fig. 7.28(f)
is the contribution of all
the detail coefficients.

was generated by simply zeroing the highest-resolution detail coefficients
(not thresholding the lower-resolution details) and reconstructing the
image. Here, almost all of the background noise has been eliminated and
the edges are only slightly disturbed. The difference image in Fig. 7.28(d)
shows the information that is lost in the process. This result was generated
by computing the inverse FWT of the two-scale transform with all but the
highest-resolution detail coefficients zeroed. As can be seen, the resulting
image contains most of the noise in the original image and some of the edge
information. Figures 7.28(e) and (f) are included to show the negative effect
of deleting all the detail coefficients. That is, Fig. 7.28(e) is a reconstruction
of the DWT in which the details at both levels of the two-scale transform
have been zeroed; Fig. 7.28(f) shows the information that is lost. Note the
significant increase in edge information in Fig. 7.28(f) and the corresponding decrease in edge detail in Fig. 7.28(e).
■

7.6

Wavelet Packets

The fast wavelet transform decomposes a function into a sum of scaling and
wavelet functions whose bandwidths are logarithmically related. That is, the
low frequency content (of the function) is represented using (scaling and
wavelet) functions with narrow bandwidths, while the high-frequency content
is represented using functions with wider bandwidths. If you look along the
frequency axis of the time-frequency plane in Fig. 7.23(c), this is immediately
apparent. Each horizontal strip of constant height tiles, which contains the
basis functions for a single FWT scale, increases logarithmically in height as
you move up the frequency axis. If we want greater control over the partitioning of the time-frequency plane (e.g., smaller bands at the higher frequencies),
the FWT must be generalized to yield a more flexible decomposition—called
a wavelet packet (Coifman and Wickerhauser [1992]). The cost of this generalization is an increase in computational complexity from O(M) for the FWT to
O(M log2 M) for a wavelet packet.
Consider again the two-scale filter bank of Fig. 7.18(a)—but imagine the decomposition as a binary tree. Figure 7.29(a) details the structure of the tree, and
links the appropriate FWT scaling and wavelet coefficients [from Fig. 7.18(a)] to
its nodes. The root node is assigned the highest-scale approximation coefficients,

Ww(J, n)  f (n)

a b

VJ

FIGURE 7.29

An (a) coefficient
tree and
(b) analysis tree
for the two-scale
FWT analysis
bank of Fig. 7.18.

Ww(J  1, n)
Ww(J  2, n)

VJ 1

Wc(J 1, n)

Wc(J  2, n)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

VJ 2

WJ 1

WJ 2

7.6 ■ Wavelet Packets

511

which are samples of the function itself, while the leaves inherit the transform’s
approximation and detail coefficient outputs. The lone intermediate node,
Ww(J - 1, n), is a filter bank approximation that is ultimately filtered to become
two leaf nodes. Note that the coefficients of each node are the weights of a linear
expansion that produces a band-limited “piece” of root node f(n). Because any
such piece is an element of a known scaling or wavelet subspace (see Sections
7.2.2 and 7.2.3), we can replace the generating coefficients in Fig. 7.29(a) by the
corresponding subspace.The result is the subspace analysis tree of Fig. 7.29(b).Although the variable W is used to denote both coefficients and subspaces, the two
quantities are distinguishable by the format of their subscripts.
These concepts are further illustrated in Fig. 7.30, where a three-scale FWT
analysis bank, analysis tree, and corresponding frequency spectrum are depicted.
Unlike Fig. 7.18(a), the block diagram of Fig. 7.30(a) is labeled to resemble the
analysis tree in Fig. 7.30(b)—as well as the spectrum in Fig. 7.30(c). Thus, while
the output of the upper-left filter and subsampler is, to be accurate,
Wc(J - 1, n), it has been labeled WJ - 1—the subspace of the function that is
generated by the Wc(J - 1, n) transform coefficients. This subspace corresponds to the upper-right leaf of the associated analysis tree, as well as the rightmost (widest bandwidth) segment of the corresponding frequency spectrum.
Analysis trees provide a compact and informative way of representing multiscale wavelet transforms. They are simple to draw, take less space than their
corresponding filter and subsampler-based block diagrams, and make it relatively

 hc(n)

2T

a
b c

WJ 1
 hc(n)

f(x)H VJ
 hw(n)

2T

2T

FIGURE 7.30

WJ 2
 hc(n)

VJ 1
 hw(n)

2T

VJ 3

WJ 3

WJ 2

2T

VJ 3

|H(v)|

VJ

VJ 2

WJ 3

VJ 2
 hw(n)

VJ 1

2T

WJ 1

VJ 2

VJ3 WJ 3

0

VJ

VJ 1

p/8 p/4

WJ 2

WJ 1

p/2

www.EBooksWorld.ir

p

v

A three-scale
FWT filter bank:
(a) block diagram;
(b) decomposition
space tree; and
(c) spectrum
splitting
characteristics.

512

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

easy to detect valid decompositions. The three-scale analysis tree of Fig. 7.30(b),
for example, makes possible the following three expansion options:
VJ = VJ - 1 { WJ - 1

(7.6-1)

VJ = VJ - 2 { WJ - 2 { WJ - 1

(7.6-2)

VJ = VJ - 3 { WJ - 3 { WJ - 2 { WJ - 1

(7.6-3)

They correspond to the one-, two-, and three-scale FWT decompositions of
Section 7.4 and may be obtained from Eq. (7.2-27) of Section 7.2.3 by letting
j0 = J - P for P = 51, 2, 36. In general, a P-scale FWT analysis tree supports
P unique decompositions.
Analysis trees also are an efficient mechanism for representing wavelet packets,
which are nothing more than conventional wavelet transforms in which the details
are filtered iteratively. Thus, the three-scale FWT analysis tree of Fig. 7.30(b)
becomes the three-scale wavelet packet tree of Fig. 7.31. Note the additional subscripting that is introduced. The first subscript of a double-subscripted node
identifies the scale of the FWT parent node from which it descended. The
second—a variable length string of As and Ds—encodes the path from the parent to the node.An A designates approximation filtering, while a D indicates detail filtering. Subspace WJ - 1, DA, for example, is obtained by “filtering” the scale
J - 1 FWT coefficients (i.e., parent WJ - 1 in Fig. 7.31) through an additional detail filter (yielding WJ - 1, D), followed by an approximation filter (giving WJ - 1, DA).
Figures 7.32(a) and (b) are the filter bank and spectrum splitting characteristics
of the analysis tree in Fig. 7.31. Note that the “naturally ordered” outputs of the
filter bank in Fig. 7.32(a) have been reordered based on frequency content in
Fig. 7.32(b) (see Problem 7.25 for more on “frequency ordered” wavelets).
The three-scale packet tree in Fig. 7.31 almost triples the number of decompositions (and associated time-frequency tilings) that are available from the threescale FWT tree. Recall that in a normal FWT, we split, filter, and downsample the
lowpass bands alone. This creates a fixed logarithmic (base 2) relationship between the bandwidths of the scaling and wavelet spaces used in the representation of a function [see Figure 7.30(c)]. Thus, while the three-scale FWT analysis
tree of Fig. 7.30(a) offers three possible decompositions—defined by Eqs. (7.6-1)
to (7.6-3)—the wavelet packet tree of Fig. 7.31 supports 26 different decompositions. For instance, VJ [and therefore function f(n)] can be expanded as

FIGURE 7.31

VJ

A three-scale
wavelet packet
analysis tree.

WJ 1

VJ 1

VJ 2

VJ  3

WJ 1, A

WJ 2

WJ 3

WJ 2, A

WJ 2, D

www.EBooksWorld.ir

WJ1, AA

WJ 1, D

WJ 1, AD WJ1, DA

WJ1, DD

7.6 ■ Wavelet Packets

 hc(n)
 hc(n)

2T

 hc(n)

2T

WJ 1, DD

a
b

 hw(n)

2T

WJ 1, DA

FIGURE 7.32

 hc(n)

2T

WJ 1, AD

 hw(n)

2T

WJ 1, AA

 hc(n)

2T

WJ 2, D

 hw(n)

2T

WJ 2, A

 hc(n)

2T

WJ 3

 hw(n)

2T

VJ 3

WJ 1, D

2T

WJ 1
 hw(n)

WJ 1, A

2T

f(x)H VJ
 hc(n)
 hw(n)

2T

513

The (a) filter bank
and (b) spectrum
splitting
characteristics of
a three-scale full
wavelet packet
analysis tree.

WJ 2

VJ 1

2T

 hw(n)

VJ 2

2T

|H(v)|
VJ
VJ 1
WJ 2

VJ 2

VJ 3

0

WJ 3

p/8

WJ 1
WJ 1, D

WJ 1, A

WJ 2, D WJ 2, A WJ 1, DA WJ 1, DD WJ 1, AD WJ 1, AA

p/4

p

p/ 2

v

VJ = VJ - 3 { WJ - 3 { WJ - 2, A { WJ - 2, D { WJ - 1, AA
{ WJ - 1, AD { WJ - 1, DA { WJ - 1, DD

(7.6-4)

whose spectrum is shown in Fig. 7.32(b), or
VJ = VJ - 1 { WJ - 1, A { WJ - 1, DA { WJ - 1, DD

(7.6-5)

whose spectrum is depicted in Fig. 7.33. Note the difference between this last
spectrum and the full packet spectrum of Fig. 7.32(b), or the three-scale FWT

Recall that { denotes
the union of spaces (like
the union of sets). The 26
decompositions associated
with Fig. 7.31 are
determined by various
combinations of nodes
(spaces) that can be
combined to represent
the root node (space) at
the top of the tree.
Eqs. (7.6-4) and (7.6-5)
define two of them.

FIGURE 7.33

|H(v)|

The spectrum of
the decomposition in Eq. (7.6-5).
VJ 1

0

WJ1,DA WJ1,DD

p/ 2

5p/ 8

WJ1, A

3p/4

www.EBooksWorld.ir

p

v

514

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

spectrum of Fig. 7.30(c). In general, P-scale, one-dimensional wavelet packet
transforms (and associated P + 1-level analysis trees) support
D(P + 1) = C D(P) D + 1
2

(7.6-6)

unique decompositions, where D(1) = 1. With such a large number of valid
expansions, packet-based transforms provide improved control over partitioning the spectrum of the decomposed function. The cost of this control is an increase in computational complexity [compare the filter bank in Fig. 7.30(a) to
that of Fig. 7.32(a)].
Now consider the two-dimensional, four-band filter bank of Fig. 7.24(a). As
was noted in Section 7.5, it splits approximation Ww(j + 1, m, n) into outputs,
V
D
Ww(j, m, n), WH
c (j, m, n), W c (j, m, n), and W c (j, m, n). As in the onedimensional case, it can be “iterated” to generate P scale transforms for scales
j = J - 1, J - 2, Á , J - P, with Ww(J, m, n) = f(m, n). The spectrum resulting from the first iteration [i.e., using j + 1 = J in Fig. 7.24(a)] is shown in
Fig. 7.34(a). Note that it divides the frequency plane into four equal areas. The
low-frequency quarter-band in the center of the plane coincides with transform coefficients Ww(J - 1, m, n) and scaling space VJ - 1. (This nomenclature
is consistent with the one-dimensional case.) To accommodate the twodimensional nature of the input, however, we now have three (rather than one)
V
D
wavelet subspaces. They are denoted WH
J - 1, W J - 1, and W J - 1 and correspond
H
V
to coefficients W c (J - 1, m, n), Wc (J - 1, m, n), and WD
c (J - 1, m, n),
respectively. Figure 7.34(b) shows the resulting four-band, single-scale quaternary
FWT analysis tree. Note the superscripts that link the wavelet subspace designations to their transform coefficient counterparts.
Figure 7.35 shows a portion of a three-scale, two-dimensional wavelet packet
analysis tree. Like its one-dimensional counterpart in Fig. 7.31, the first subscript of
every node that is a descendant of a conventional FWT detail node is the scale of
that parent detail node.The second subscript—a variable length string of As,Hs,Vs,
and Ds—encodes the path from the parent to the node under consideration. The
node labeled WH
J - 1, VD , for example, is obtained by “row/column filtering” the
a b

p

FIGURE 7.34

The first
decomposition of
a two-dimensional
FWT: (a) the
spectrum and
(b) the subspace
analysis tree.

D

WJ 1

H

p

WJ 1

v vertical
V

D

WJ 1

WJ 1

VJ  1

WJ 1

H

p

vhorizontal
VJ

D

WJ 1

V

WJ 1

D

WJ 1

p

www.EBooksWorld.ir

VJ 1

H

WJ 1

V

WJ 1

D

WJ 1

7.6 ■ Wavelet Packets

515

VJ

H

VJ 1

H

VJ  2

H

VJ  3 WJ 3

V

H

H

D

WJ 1

WJ 1

H

WJ 2

D

V

WJ 1

WJ 1, V

H

H

WJ  3 WJ 3 WJ 2, A WJ 2,H WJ 2, V WJ 2, D

H

H

H

H

WJ 1, VA WJ 1, VH WJ 1, VV WJ 1, VD

FIGURE 7.35 A three-scale, full wavelet packet decomposition tree. Only a portion of the tree is provided.

scale J - 1 FWT horizontal detail coefficients (i.e., parent WH
J - 1 in Fig. 7.35)
through an additional detail/approximation filter (yielding W H
J - 1, V), followed by a
H
detail/detail filter (giving W J - 1, VD). A P-scale, two-dimensional wavelet packet tree supports
D(P + 1) = C D(P) D + 1
4

(7.6-7)

unique expansions, where D(1) = 1. Thus, the three-scale tree of Fig. 7.35 offers 83,522 possible decompositions. The problem of selecting among them is
the subject of the next example.

■ As noted in the above discussion, a single wavelet packet tree presents numerous decomposition options. In fact, the number of possible decompositions is
often so large that it is impractical, if not impossible, to enumerate or examine
them individually.An efficient algorithm for finding optimal decompositions with
respect to application specific criteria is highly desirable. As will be seen, classical
entropy- and energy-based cost functions are applicable in many situations and
are well suited for use in binary and quaternary tree searching algorithms.
Consider the problem of reducing the amount of data needed to represent
the 400 * 480 fingerprint image in Fig. 7.36(a). Image compression is discussed in detail in Chapter 8. In this example, we want to select the “best”
three-scale wavelet packet decomposition as a starting point for the compression process. Using three-scale wavelet packet trees, there are 83,522
[see Eq. (7.6-7)] potential decompositions. Figure 7.36(b) shows one of
them—a full wavelet packet, 64-leaf decomposition like the analysis tree of
Fig. 7.35. Note that the leaves of the tree correspond to the subbands of the
8 * 8 array of decomposed subimages in Fig. 7.36(b). The probability that this
particular 64-leaf decomposition is in some way optimal for the purpose of
compression, however, is relatively low. In the absence of a suitable optimality
criterion, we can neither confirm nor deny it.
One reasonable criterion for selecting a decomposition for the compression
of the image of Fig. 7.36(a) is the additive cost function
E(f) = a ƒ f(m, n) ƒ
m, n

www.EBooksWorld.ir

(7.6-8)

EXAMPLE 7.15:
Two-dimensional
wavelet packet
decompositions.

The 64 leaf nodes in
Fig. 7.35 correspond to
the 8 * 8 array of 64
subimages in Fig. 7.36(b).
Despite appearances,
they are not square. The
distortion (particularly
noticeable in the
approximation subimage) is due to the
program used to produce
the result.

516

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

a b
FIGURE 7.36 (a) A scanned fingerprint and (b) its three-scale, full wavelet packet decomposition. (Original

image courtesy of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.)

Other possible energy
measures include the
sum of the squares of
f(x, y), the sum of the
log of the squares, etc.
Problem 7.27 defines one
possible entropy-based
cost function.

This function provides one possible measure of the energy content of twodimensional function f. Under this measure, the energy of function f(m, n) = 0
for all m and n is 0. High values of E, on the other hand, are indicative of functions with many nonzero values. Since most transform-based compression
schemes work by truncating or thresholding the small coefficients to zero, a cost
function that maximizes the number of near-zero values is a reasonable criterion
for selecting a “good” decomposition from a compression point of view.
The cost function just described is both computationally simple and easily
adapted to tree optimization routines. The optimization algorithm must use
the function to minimize the “cost” of the leaf nodes in the decomposition
tree. Minimal energy leaf nodes should be favored because they have more
near-zero values, which leads to greater compression. Because the cost function of Eq. (7.6-8) is a local measure that uses only the information available at
the node under consideration, an efficient algorithm for finding minimal energy
solutions is easily constructed as follows:
For each node of the analysis tree, beginning with the root and proceeding
level by level to the leaves:
Step 1. Compute both the energy of the node, denoted EP (for parent
energy), and the energy of its four offspring—denoted EA, EH, EV, and
ED. For two-dimensional wavelet packet decompositions, the parent is
a two-dimensional array of approximation or detail coefficients; the

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.6 ■ Wavelet Packets

517

offspring are the filtered approximation, horizontal, vertical, and diagonal details.
Step 2. If the combined energy of the offspring is less than the energy of the
parent—that is, EA + EH + EV + ED 6 EP—include the offspring in the
analysis tree. If the combined energy of the offspring is greater than or
equal to that of the parent, prune the offspring, keeping only the parent. It
is a leaf of the optimized analysis tree.
The preceding algorithm can be used to (1) prune wavelet packet trees or (2)
design procedures for computing optimal trees from scratch. In the latter case,
nonessential siblings—descendants of nodes that would be eliminated in step 2
of the algorithm—would not be computed. Figure 7.37 shows the optimized
decomposition that results from applying the algorithm to the image of
Fig. 7.36(a) with the cost function of Eq. (7.6-8). The corresponding analysis
tree is given in Fig. 7.38. Note that many of the original full packet decomposition’s 64 subbands in Fig. 7.36(b) (and corresponding 64 leaves of the analysis tree in Fig. 7.35) have been eliminated. In addition, the subimages that are
not split (further decomposed) in Fig. 7.37 are relatively smooth and composed of pixels that are middle gray in value. Because all but the approximation subimage of this figure have been scaled so that gray level 128 indicates a
zero-valued coefficient, these subimages contain little energy. There would be
no overall decrease in energy realized by splitting them.
■
The preceding example is based on a real-world problem that was solved
through the use of wavelets. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) currently maintains a large database of fingerprints and has established a waveletbased national standard for the digitization and compression of fingerprint
FIGURE 7.37

An optimal
wavelet packet
decomposition for
the fingerprint of
Fig. 7.36(a).

www.EBooksWorld.ir

518

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing
VJ
V

VJ1

H

VJ2

H

VJ3 WJ3

V

V

WJ2

D

H

H

D

WJ2

H

H

D

WJ1

V

V

V

WJ2

V

V

D

V

WJ1

V

V

WJ1,A WJ1,H WJ1,V WJ1,D

D

D

D

V

V

V

V

WJ3 WJ3 WJ2,A WJ2,H WJ2,V WJ2,D WJ2,A WJ2,H WJ2,V WJ2,D WJ2,A WJ2,H WJ2,V WJ2,D WJ1,AA WJ1,AH WJ1,AV WJ1,AD
H

WJ1

H

H

H

H

WJ1,A

WJ1,H

H

H

H

WJ1,AA WJ1,AH WJ1,AV WJ1,AD

H

WJ1,V

WJ1,D

H

H

H

H

WJ1,DA WJ1,DH WJ1,DV WJ1,DD

FIGURE 7.38 The optimal wavelet packet analysis tree for the decomposition in Fig. 7.37.

images (FBI [1993]). Using biorthogonal wavelets, the standard achieves a typical
compression ratio of 15:1. The advantages of wavelet-based compression over
the more traditional JPEG approach are examined in the next chapter.
The decomposition filters used in Example 7.15, as well as by the FBI, are
part of a well-known family of wavelets called Cohen-Daubechies-Feauveau
biorthogonal wavelets (Cohen, Daubechies, and Feauveau [1992]). Because
the scaling and wavelet functions of the family are symmetrical and have similar lengths, they are among the most widely used biorthogonal wavelets.
Figures 7.39(e) through (h) show the dual scaling and wavelet functions.
Figures 7.39(a) through (d) are the corresponding decomposition and reconstruction filters. The coefficients of the lowpass and highpass decomposition
filters, h0(n) and h1(n) for 0 … n … 17 are shown in Table 7.4. The corresponding coefficients of the biorthogonal synthesis filters can be computed
using g0(n) = (-1)n + 1h1(n) and g1(n) = (-1)n h0(n) of Eq. (7.1-11). That is,
they are cross-modulated versions of the decomposition filters. Note that zero
padding is employed to make the filters the same length and that Table 7.4 and
Fig. 7.39 define them with respect to the subband coding and decoding system
of Fig. 7.6(a); with respect to the FWT, hw(-n) = h0(n) and hc(-n) = h1(n).
TABLE 7.4
Biorthogonal
CohenDaubechiesFeauveau filter
coefficients
(Cohen,
Daubechies, and
Feauveau [1992]).

n

h0(n)

h1(n)

n

h0(n)

h1(n)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

0
0.0019
-0.0019
-0.017
0.0119
0.0497
-0.0773
-0.0941
0.4208

0
0
0
0.0144
-0.0145
-0.0787
0.0404
0.4178
-0.7589

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

0.8259
0.4208
-0.0941
-0.0773
0.0497
0.0119
-0.017
-0.0019
0.0010

0.4178
0.0404
-0.0787
-0.0145
0.0144
0
0
0
0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

7.6 ■ Wavelet Packets

a b
c d
e f
g h

h1(n)
0.6

h0(n)
1.2
1

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.6

0

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.4

FIGURE 7.39

0.6

0
0.2

0

4

8

12

16

n

0.8

0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

16

n

g1(n)
0.5

g0(n)
0.8
0.6

0

0.4
0.2

0.5

0
0.2

0

4

8

12

16

n

~
w(x)
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0.4

1

n

w(x)
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.5

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18

x

~

c(x)
1.2

1

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18

x

c(x)
1.5

1

1

0.8
0.6

0.5

0.4

0

0.2

0.5

0
0.2

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18

x

1

519

0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

x

A member of the
CohenDaubechiesFeauveau
biorthogonal
wavelet family:
(a) and (b)
decomposition
filter coefficients;
(c) and (d)
reconstruction
filter coefficients;
(e)–(h) dual
wavelet and
scaling functions.
See Table 7.3 for
the values of
h0(n) and h1(n)
for 0 … n … 17.

520

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

Summary
The material of this chapter establishes a solid mathematical foundation for understanding and accessing the role of wavelets and multiresolution analysis in image processing. Wavelets and wavelet transforms are relatively new imaging tools that are
being rapidly applied to a wide variety of image processing problems. Because of their
similarity to the Fourier transform, many of the techniques in Chapter 4 have wavelet
domain counterparts. A partial listing of the imaging applications that have been approached from a wavelet point of view includes image matching, registration, segmentation, denoising, restoration, enhancement, compression, morphological filtering, and
computed tomography. Since it is impractical to cover all of these applications in a single chapter, the topics included were chosen for their value in introducing or clarifying
fundamental concepts and preparing the reader for further study in the field. In
Chapter 8, we will apply wavelets to the compression of images.

References and Further Reading
There are many good texts on wavelets and their application. Several complement our
treatment and were relied upon during the development of the core sections of the
chapter. The material in Section 7.1.2 on subband coding and digital filtering follows
the book by Vetterli and Kovacevic [1995], while Sections 7.2 and 7.4 on multiresolution expansions and the fast wavelet transform follow the treatment of these subjects in
Burrus, Gopinath, and Guo [1998]. The remainder of the material in the chapter is
based on the references cited in the text. All of the examples in the chapter were done
using MATLAB (see Gonzalez et al. [2004]).
The history of wavelet analysis is recorded in a book by Hubbard [1998]. The early
predecessors of wavelets were developed simultaneously in different fields and unified
in a paper by Mallat [1987]. It brought a mathematical framework to the field. Much of
the history of wavelets can be traced through the works of Meyer [1987] [1990] [1992a,
1992b] [1993], Mallat [1987] [1989a–c] [1998], and Daubechies [1988] [1990] [1992]
[1993] [1996]. The current interest in wavelets was stimulated by many of their publications. The book by Daubechies [1992] is a classic source for the mathematical details of
wavelet theory.
The application of wavelets to image processing is addressed in general image processing texts, like Castleman [1996], and many application specific books, some of
which are conference proceedings. In this latter category, for example, are Rosenfeld
[1984], Prasad and Iyengar [1997], and Topiwala [1998]. Recent articles that can serve
as starting points for further research into specific imaging applications include Gao
et al. [2007] on corner detection; Olkkonen and Olkkonen [2007] on lattice implementations; Selesnick et al. [2005] and Kokare et al. [2005] on complex wavelets; Thévenaz
and Unser [2000] for image registration; Chang and Kuo [1993] and Unser [1995] on
texture-based classification; Heijmans and Goutsias [2000] on morphological wavelets;
Banham et al. [1994], Wang, Zhang, and Pan [1995], and Banham and Kastaggelos
[1996] on image restoration; Xu et al. [1994] and Chang, Yu, and Vetterli [2000] on
image enhancement; Delaney and Bresler [1995] and Westenberg and Roerdink [2000]
on computed tomography; and Lee, Sun, and Chen [1995], Liang and Kuo [1999], Wang,
Lee, and Toraichi [1999], and You and Bhattacharya [2000] on image description and
matching. One of the most important applications of wavelets is image compression—
see, for example, Brechet et al. [2007], Demin Wang et al. [2006], Antonini et al. [1992],
Wei et al. [1998], and the book by Topiwala [1998]. Finally, there have been a number of
special issues devoted to wavelets, including a special issue on wavelet transforms and
multiresolution signal anaysis in the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory [1992],
a special issue on wavelets and signal processing in the IEEE Transactions on Signal
www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

Processing [1993], and a special section on multiresolution representation in the IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence [1989].
Although the chapter focuses on the fundamentals of wavelets and their application
to image processing, there is considerable interest in the construction of wavelets themselves. The interested reader is referred to the work of Battle [1987] [1988], Daubechies
[1988] [1992], Cohen and Daubechies [1992], Meyer [1990], Mallat [1989b], Unser,
Aldroubi, and Eden [1993], and Gröchenig and Madych [1992]. This is not an exhaustive list but should serve as a starting point for further reading. See also the general references on subband coding and filter banks, including Strang and Nguyen [1996] and
Vetterli and Kovacevic [1995], and the references included in the chapter with respect
to the wavelets we used as examples.

Problems
7.1

 7.2

Design a system for decoding the prediction residual pyramid generated by the
encoder of Fig. 7.2(b) and draw its block diagram. Assume there is no quantization error introduced by the encoder.
Construct a fully populated approximation pyramid and corresponding prediction residual pyramid for the image
1
5
f(x, y) = D
9
13

 7.3

7.4

2
6
10
14

3
7
11
15

4
8
T
12
16

Use 2 * 2 block neighborhood averaging for the approximation filter in Fig. 7.2(b)
and assume the interpolation filter implements pixel replication.
Given a 2 J * 2 J image, does a J + 1-level pyramid reduce or expand the
amount of data required to represent the image? What is the compression or expansion ratio?
Is the two-band subband coding filter bank containing filters h0(n) = E 1> 12,
and g1(n)
1> 12 F , h1(n) = E -1> 12, 1> 12 F , g0(n) = E 1> 12, 1> 12 F ,
= E 1> 12, -1> 12 F orthonormal, biorthogonal, or both?

7.8

Given the sequence f(n) = 50, 0.5, 0.25, 16 where n = 0, 1, 2, 3, compute:
(a) The sign-reversed sequence.
(b) The order-reversed sequence.
(c) The modulated sequence.
(d) The modulated and then order-reversed sequence.
(e) The order-reversed and then modulated sequence.
(f) Does the result from (d) or (e) correspond to Eq. (7.1-9)?
Compute the coefficients of the Daubechies synthesis filters g0(n) and g1(n)
for Example 7.2. Using Eq. (7.1-13) with m = 0 only, show that the filters are
orthonormal.
Draw a two-dimensional four-band filter bank decoder to reconstruct input
f(m, n) in Fig. 7.7.
Obtain the Haar transformation matrix for N = 8.

7.9

(a) Compute the Haar transform of the 2 * 2 image

7.5

7.6

 7.7

F = B

3
6

-1
R
2
www.EBooksWorld.ir

521

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing
(b) The inverse Haar transform is F = H TTH, where T is the Haar transform of
F and H T is the matrix inverse of H. Show that H 2-1 = H T2 and use it to compute the inverse Haar transform of the result in (a).
7.10 Compute the expansion coefficients of 2-tuple [3, 2]T for the following bases
and write the corresponding expansions:
 (a) Basis w0 = C 1> 12, 1> 12, D T and w1 = C 1> 12, -1> 12, D T on R2, the set of
real 2-tuples.
'
(b) Basis w0 = [1, 0]T and w1 = [1, 1]T, and its dual, w0 = [1, -1]T and
'
T
2
w1 = [0, 1] , on R .
(c) Basis w0 = [1, 0]T, w1 = C -1>2, 13>2 D T, and w2 = C -1>2, - 13>2 D T, and
'
their duals, wi = 2wi>3 for i = 50, 1, 2,6, on R2.
(Hint: Vector inner products must be used in place of the integral inner products
of Section 7.2.1.)
7.11 Show that scaling function
w(x) = b

7.12

 7.13
7.14

7.15

7.16

 7.17

1
0

0.25 … x 6 0.75
elsewhere

does not satisfy the second requirement of a multiresolution analysis.
Write an expression for scaling space V3 as a function of scaling function w(x).
Use the Haar scaling function definition of Eq. (7.2-14) to draw the Haar V3 scaling functions at translations k = 50, 1, 26.
Draw wavelet c3,3 (x) for the Haar wavelet function. Write an expression for
c3,3 (x) in terms of Haar scaling functions.
Suppose function f(x) is a member of Haar scaling space V3—that is, f(x) H V3.
Use Eq. (7.2-22) to express V3 as a function of scaling space V0 and any required wavelet spaces. If f(x) is 0 outside the interval [0, 1), sketch the scaling
and wavelet functions required for a linear expansion of f(x) based on your
expression.
Compute the first four terms of the wavelet series expansion of the function
used in Example 7.7 with starting scale j0 = 1. Write the resulting expansion in
terms of the scaling and wavelet functions involved. How does your result compare to the example, where the starting scale was j0 = 0?
The DWT in Eqs. (7.3-5) and (7.3-6) is a function of starting scale j0.
(a) Recompute the one-dimensional DWT of function f(n) = 51, 4, -3, 06 for
0 … n … 3 in Example 7.8 with j0 = 1 (rather than 0).
(b) Use the result from (a) to compute f(1) from the transform values.
What does the following continuous wavelet transform reveal about the onedimensional function upon which it was based?

Scale

522

Time

www.EBooksWorld.ir

■ Problems

7.18

(a) The continuous wavelet transform of Problem 7.17 is computer generated.
The function upon which it is based was first sampled at discrete intervals.
What is continuous about the transform—or what distinguishes it from the
discrete wavelet transform of the function?
 (b) Under what circumstances is the DWT a better choice than the CWT? Are
there times when the CWT is better than the DWT?
 7.19 Draw the FWT filter bank required to compute the transform in Problem 7.16.
Label all inputs and outputs with the appropriate sequences.
7.20 The computational complexity of an M-point fast wavelet transform is O(M).
That is, the number of operations is proportional M. What determines the constant of proportionality?
7.21  (a) If the input to the three-scale FWT filter bank of Fig. 7.30(a) is the Haar
scaling function w(n) = 1 for n = 0, 1, Á , 7 and 0 elsewhere, what is the resulting transform with respect to Haar wavelets?
(b) What is the transform if the input is the corresponding Haar wavelet function c(n) = 51, 1, 1, 1, -1, -1, - 1, - 16 for n = 0, 1, Á , 7?
(c) What input sequence produces transform 50, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, B, 06 with nonzero
coefficient Wc(2, 2) = B?
 7.22 The two-dimensional fast wavelet transform is similar to the pyramidal coding
scheme of Section 7.2.1. How are they similar? Given the three-scale wavelet
transform in Fig. 7.10(a), how would you construct the corresponding approximation pyramid? How many levels would it have?
7.23 Compute the two-dimensional wavelet transform with respect to Haar wavelets
of the 2 * 2 image in Problem 7.9. Draw the required filter bank and label all
inputs and outputs with the proper arrays.
 7.24 In the Fourier domain
f(x - x0, y - y0) 3 F(m, y)e -2p(mx0 >M + yy0 >N)
and translation does not affect the display of ƒ F(m, y) ƒ . Using the following sequence of images, explain the translation property of wavelet transforms. The
leftmost image contains two 32 * 32 white squares centered on a 128 * 128
gray background. The second image (from the left) is its single-scale wavelet
transform with respect to Haar wavelets. The third is the wavelet transform of
the original image after shifting it 32 pixels to the right and downward, and the
final (rightmost) image is the wavelet transform of the original image after it has
been shifted one pixel to the right and downward.

7.25

The following table shows the Haar wavelet and scaling functions for a fourscale fast wavelet transform. Sketch the additional basis functions needed for a
full three-scale packet decomposition. Give the mathematical expression or expressions for determining them. Then order the basis functions according to frequency content and explain the results.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

523

524

Chapter 7 ■ Wavelets and Multiresolution Processing

V0
V1

W0

W1, A

W1

V2

W1, D

W2, AA

W2, A

W2, AD

W2, DA

V3

W2, D

W2

W2, DD

7.26

A wavelet packet decomposition of the vase from Fig. 7.1 is shown below.
(a) Draw the corresponding decomposition analysis tree, labeling all nodes
with the names of the proper scaling and wavelet spaces.
(b) Draw and label the decomposition’s frequency spectrum.

7.27

Using the Haar wavelet, determine the minimum entropy packet decomposition
for the function f(n) = 0.25 for n = 0, 1, 2, Á , 15. Employ the nonnormalized
Shannon entropy,
E C f(n) D = a f2(n) ln C f2(n) D
n

as the minimization criterion. Draw the optimal tree, labeling the nodes with the
computed entropy values.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

8

Image Compression
But life is short and information endless Á
Abbreviation is a necessary evil and the abbreviator’s
business is to make the best of a job which, although
intrinsically bad, is still better than nothing.
Aldous Huxley

Preview
Image compression, the art and science of reducing the amount of data required
to represent an image, is one of the most useful and commercially successful
technologies in the field of digital image processing. The number of images that
are compressed and decompressed daily is staggering, and the compressions
and decompressions themselves are virtually invisible to the user. Anyone who
owns a digital camera, surfs the web, or watches the latest Hollywood movies
on Digital Video Disks (DVDs) benefits from the algorithms and standards
discussed in this chapter.
To better understand the need for compact image representations, consider
the amount of data required to represent a two-hour standard definition (SD)
television movie using 720 * 480 * 24 bit pixel arrays. A digital movie (or
video) is a sequence of video frames in which each frame is a full-color still
image. Because video players must display the frames sequentially at rates
near 30 fps (frames per second), SD digital video data must be accessed at
30

pixels
bytes
frames
* (720 * 480)
* 3
= 31,104,000 bytes>sec
sec
frame
pixel

and a two-hour movie consists of
31,104,000

bytes
sec
* A 60 2 B
* 2 hrs ⬵ 2.24 * 1011 bytes
sec
hr

525
www.EBooksWorld.ir

526

Chapter 8 ■ Image Compression

or 224 GB (gigabytes) of data. Twenty-seven 8.5 GB dual-layer DVDs (assuming
conventional 12 cm disks) are needed to store it. To put a two-hour movie on a
single DVD, each frame must be compressed—on average—by a factor of 26.3.
The compression must be even higher for high definition (HD) television, where
image resolutions reach 1920 * 1080 * 24 bits>image.
Web page images and high-resolution digital camera photos also are compressed routinely to save storage space and reduce transmission time. For example, residential Internet connections deliver data at speeds ranging from 56 Kbps
(kilobits per second) via conventional phone lines to more than 12 Mbps
(megabits per second) for broadband. The time required to transmit a small
128 * 128 * 24 bit full-color image over this range of speeds is from 7.0 to
0.03 seconds. Compression can reduce transmission time by a factor of 2 to 10
or more. In the same way, the number of uncompressed full-color images that
an 8-megapixel digital camera can store on a 1-GB flash memory card [about
forty-one 24 MB (megabyte) images] can be similarly increased. In addition to
these applications, image compression plays an important role in many other
areas, including televideo conferencing, remote sensing, document and medical
imaging, and facsimile transmission (FAX). An increasing number of applications depend on the efficient manipulation, storage, and transmission of binary,
gray-scale, and color images.
In this chapter, we introduce the theory and practice of digital image compression. We examine the most frequently used compression techniques and
describe the industry standards that make them useful. The material is introductory in nature and applicable to both still image and video applications.The chapter concludes with an introduction to digital image watermarking, the process of
inserting visible and invisible data (like copyright information) into images.

8.1

Fundamentals

The term data compression refers to the process of reducing the amount of data
required to represent a given quantity of information. In this definition, data and
information are not the same thing; data are the means by which information is
conveyed. Because various amounts of data can be used to represent the same
amount of information, representations that contain irrelevant or repeated
information are said to contain redundant data. If we let b and b¿ denote the number of bits (or information-carrying units) in two representations of the same
information, the relative data redundancy R of the representation with b bits is
R = 1 -

1
C

(8.1-1)

where C, commonly called the compression ratio, is defined as
C =

b
b¿

(8.1-2)

If C = 10 (sometimes written 10:1), for instance, the larger representation
has 10 bits of data for every 1 bit of data in the smaller representation.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

8.1 ■ Fundamentals

527

The corresponding relative data redundancy of the larger representation is 0.9
(R = 0.9), indicating that 90% of its data is redundant.
In the context of digital image compression, b in Eq. (8.1-2) usually is the
number of bits needed to represent an image as a 2-D array of intensity values.
The 2-D intensity arrays introduced in Section 2.4.2 are the preferred formats
for human viewing and interpretation—and the standard by which all other
representations are judged. When it comes to compact image representation,
however, these formats are far from optimal. Two-dimensional intensity arrays
suffer from three principal types of data redundancies that can be identified
and exploited:
1. Coding redundancy. A code is a system of symbols (letters, numbers, bits, and
the like) used to represent a body of information or set of events. Each piece
of information or event is assigned a sequence of code symbols, called a code
word. The number of symbols in each code word is its length. The 8-bit codes
that are used to represent the intensities in most 2-D intensity arrays contain
more bits than are needed to represent the intensities.
2. Spatial and temporal redundancy. Because the pixels of most 2-D intensity
arrays are correlated spatially (i.e., each pixel is similar to or dependent on
neighboring pixels), information is unnecessarily replicated in the representations of the correlated pixels. In a video sequence, temporally correlated pixels (i.e., those similar to or dependent on pixels in nearby frames)
also duplicate information.
3. Irrelevant information. Most 2-D intensity arrays contain information that
is ignored by the human visual system and/or extraneous to the intended
use of the image. It is redundant in the sense that it is not used.
The computer-generated images in Figs. 8.1(a) through (c) exhibit each of these
fundamental redundancies. As will be seen in the next three sections, compression is achieved when one or more redundancy is reduced or eliminated.

a b c
FIGURE 8.1 Computer generated 256 * 256 * 8 bit images with (a) coding redundancy, (b) spatial redundancy,

and (c) irrelevant information. (Each was designed to demonstrate one principal redundancy but may exhibit
others as well.)

www.EBooksWorld.ir

528

Chapter 8 ■ Image Compression

8.1.1 Coding Redundancy
In Chapter 3, we developed techniques for image enhancement by histogram
processing, assuming that the intensity values of an image are random quantities. In this section, we use a similar formulation to introduce optimal information coding.
Assume that a discrete random variable rk in the interval [0, L - 1] is used
to represent the intensities of an M * N image and that each rk occurs with
probability pr(rk). As in Section 3.3,
pr1rk2 =

nk
MN

k = 0, 1, 2, Á , L - 1

(8.1-3)

where L is the number of intensity values, and nk is the number of times that
the kth intensity appears in the image. If the number of bits used to represent
each value of rk is l1rk2, then the average number of bits required to represent
each pixel is
L-1

Lavg = a l1rk2pr1rk2

(8.1-4)

k=0

That is, the average length of the code words assigned to the various intensity
values is found by summing the products of the number of bits used to represent each intensity and the probability that the intensity occurs. The total
number of bits required to represent an M * N image is MNLavg. If the
intensities are represented using a natural m-bit fixed-length code,† the
right-hand side of Eq. (8.1-4) reduces to m bits. That is, Lavg = m when m is
substituted for l1rk2. The constant m can be taken outside the summation,
leaving only the sum of the pr1rk2 for 0 … k … L - 1, which, of course, equals 1.
EXAMPLE 8.1:
A simple
illustration of
variable-length
coding.

■ The computer-generated image in Fig. 8.1(a) has the intensity distribution
shown in the second column of Table 8.1. If a natural 8-bit binary code (denoted
as code 1 in Table 8.1) is used to represent its 4 possible intensities, Lavg—the
average number of bits for code 1—is 8 bits, because l11rk2 = 8 bits for all rk.

TABLE 8.1
Example of
variable-length
coding.

rk

pr1rk2

Code 1

l 11rk2

Code 2

l 21rk2

r87 = 87
r128 = 128
r186 = 186
r255 = 255
rk for k Z 87, 128, 186, 255

0.25
0.47
0.25
0.03
0

01010111
10000000
11000100
11111111
—

8
8
8
8
8

01
1
000
001
—

2
1
3
3
0

†

A natural binary code is one in which each event or piece of information to be encoded (such as intensity value) is assigned one of 2m codes from an m-bit binary counting sequence.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

8.1 ■ Fundamentals

On the other hand, if the scheme designated as code 2 in Table 8.1 is used, the average length of the encoded pixels is, in accordance with Eq. (8.1-4),
Lavg = 0.25(2) + 0.47(1) + 0.25(3) + 0.03(3) = 1.81 bits
The total number of bits needed to represent the entire image is MNLavg =
256 * 256 * 1.81 or 118,621. From Eqs. (8.1-2) and (8.1-1), the resulting compression and corresponding relative redundancy are
C =

256 * 256 * 8
8
=
L 4.42
118,621
1.81

and
R = 1 -

1
= 0.774
4.42

respectively. Thus 77.4% of the data in the original 8-bit 2-D intensity array is
redundant.
The compression achieved by code 2 results from assigning fewer bits to
the more probable intensity values than to the less probable ones. In the resulting variable-length code, r128 —the image’s most probable intensity—is assigned the 1-bit code word 1 [of length l2(r128) = 1 ], while r255 —its least probable
occurring intensity—is assigned the 3-bit code word 001 [of length l2 A r255 B = 3 ].
Note that the best fixed-length code that can be assigned to the intensities of
the image in Fig. 8.1(a) is the natural 2-bit counting sequence 500, 01, 10, 116,
but the resulting compression is only 8>2 or 4:1—about 10% less than the
4.42:1 compression of the variable-length code.
■
As the preceding example shows, coding redundancy is present when the
codes assigned to a set of events (such as intensity values) do not take full advantage of the probabilities of the events. Coding redundancy is almost always
present when the intensities of an image are represented using a natural binary
code. The reason is that most images are composed of objects that have a regular and somewhat predictable morphology (shape) and reflectance, and are
sampled so that the objects being depicted are much larger than the picture elements. The natural consequence is that, for most images, certain intensities are
more probable than others (that is, the histograms of most images are not uniform). A natural binary encoding assigns the same number of bits to both the
most and least probable values, failing to minimize Eq. (8.1-4) and resulting in
coding redundancy.

8.1.2 Spatial and Temporal Redundancy
Consider the computer-generated collection of constant intensity lines in
Fig. 8.1(b). In the corresponding 2-D intensity array:
1. All 256 intensities are equally probable. As Fig. 8.2 shows, the histogram of
the image is uniform.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

529

530

Chapter 8 ■ Image Compression

FIGURE 8.2 The

intensity histogram
of the image in
Fig. 8.1(b).

nk

pr (rk)

256

1
256

0

0
0

50

100

150

200

250

k

2. Because the intensity of each line was selected randomly, its pixels are independent of one another in the vertical direction.
3. Because the pixels along each line are identical, they are maximally correlated (completely dependent on one another) in the horizontal direction.
The first observation tells us that the image in Fig. 8.1(b)—when represented
as a conventional 8-bit intensity array—cannot be compressed by variablelength coding alone. Unlike the image of Fig. 8.1(a) (and Example 8.1), whose
histogram was not uniform, a fixed-length 8-bit code in this case minimizes
Eq. (8.1-4). Observations 2 and 3 reveal a significant spatial redundancy that
can be eliminated, for instance, by representing the image in Fig. 8.1(b) as a
sequence of run-length pairs, where each run-length pair specifies the start of
a new intensity and the number of consecutive pixels that have that intensity.
A run-length based representation compresses the original 2-D, 8-bit intensity
array by (256 * 256 * 8)>[(256 + 256) * 8] or 128:1. Each 256-pixel line of
the original representation is replaced by a single 8-bit intensity value and
length 256 in the run-length representation.
In most images, pixels are correlated spatially (in both x and y) and in time
(when the image is part of a video sequence). Because most pixel intensities
can be predicted reasonably well from neighboring intensities, the information
carried by a single pixel is small. Much of its visual contribution is redundant in
the sense that it can be inferred from its neighbors. To reduce the redundancy
associated with spatially and temporally correlated pixels, a 2-D intensity array
must be transformed into a more efficient but usually “non-visual” representation. For example, run-lengths or the differences between adjacent pixels can
be used. Transformations of this type are called mappings. A mapping is said to
be reversible if the pixels of the original 2-D intensity array can be reconstructed without error from the transformed data set; otherwise the mapping is
said to be irreversible.

8.1.3 Irrelevant Information
One of the simplest ways to compress a set of data is to remove superfluous
data from the set. In the context of digital image compression, information that
is ignored by the human visual system or is extraneous to the intended use of an
image are obvious candidates for omission. Thus, the computer-generated
image in Fig. 8.1(c), because it appears to be a homogeneous field of gray, can

www.EBooksWorld.ir

8.1 ■ Fundamentals

531

be represented by its average intensity alone—a single 8-bit value. The original
256 * 256 * 8 bit intensity array is reduced to a single byte; and the resulting
compression is (256 * 256 * 8)>8 or 65,536:1. Of course, the original
256 * 256 * 8 bit image must be recreated to view and/or analyze it—but
there would be little or no perceived decrease in reconstructed image quality.
Figure 8.3(a) shows the histogram of the image in Fig. 8.1(c). Note that
there are several intensity values (intensities 125 through 131) actually
present. The human visual system averages these intensities, perceives only
the average value, and ignores the small changes in intensity that are present in this case. Figure 8.3(b), a histogram equalized version of the image
in Fig. 8.1(c), makes the intensity changes visible and reveals two previously undetected regions of constant intensity—one oriented vertically and
the other horizontally. If the image in Fig. 8.1(c) is represented by its average value alone, this “invisible” structure (i.e., the constant intensity regions) and the random intensity variations surrounding them—real
information—is lost. Whether or not this information should be preserved is
application dependent. If the information is important, as it might be in a
medical application (like digital X-ray archival), it should not be omitted;
otherwise, the information is redundant and can be excluded for the sake of
compression performance.
We conclude the section by noting that the redundancy examined here is
fundamentally different from the redundancies discussed in Sections 8.1.1 and
8.1.2. Its elimination is possible because the information itself is not essential
for normal visual processing and/or the intended use of the image. Because its
omission results in a loss of quantitative information, its removal is commonly
referred to as quantization. This terminology is consistent with normal use of
the word, which generally means the mapping of a broad range of input values
to a limited number of output values (see Section 2.4). Because information is
lost, quantization is an irreversible operation.

8.1.4 Measuring Image Information
In the previous sections, we introduced several ways to reduce the amount of
data used to represent an image. The question that naturally arises is this: How
a b

7000

FIGURE 8.3

Number of pixels

6000

(a) Histogram of
the image in
Fig. 8.1(c) and
(b) a histogram
equalized version
of the image.

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0

50

100

150

200

250

www.EBooksWorld.ir

532

Chapter 8 ■ Image Compression

Consult the book Web
site for a brief review of
information and probability theory.

few bits are actually needed to represent the information in an image? That is,
is there a minimum amount of data that is sufficient to describe an image without losing information? Information theory provides the mathematical framework to answer this and related questions. Its fundamental premise is that the
generation of information can be modeled as a probabilistic process that can
be measured in a manner that agrees with intuition. In accordance with this
supposition, a random event E with probability P(E) is said to contain
I(E) = log

1
= -log P(E)
P(E)

(8.1-5)

units of information. If P(E) = 1 (that is, the event always occurs), I(E) = 0
and no information is attributed to it. Because no uncertainty is associated
with the event, no information would be transferred by communicating that
the event has occurred [it always occurs if P(E) = 1].
The base of the logarithm in Eq. (8.1-5) determines the unit used to measure information. If the base m logarithm is used, the measurement is said
to be in m-ary units. If the base 2 is selected, the unit of information is the
bit. Note that if P(E) = 12, I(E) = -log2 21, or 1 bit. That is, 1 bit is the
amount of information conveyed when one of two possible equally likely
events occurs. A simple example is flipping a coin and communicating the
result.
Given a source of statistically independent random events from a discrete
set of possible events 5a 1, a 2, Á , aJ6 with associated probabilities 5P(a 1),
P(a2), Á , P(a J)6, the average information per source output, called the
entropy of the source, is
H = - a P A a j B log P A a j B
J

(8.1-6)

j=1

The a j in this equation are called source symbols. Because they are statistically
independent, the source itself is called a zero-memory source.
If an image is considered to be the output of an imaginary zero-memory
“intensity source,” we can use the histogram of the observed image to estimate the symbol probabilities of the source. Then the intensity source’s entropy becomes
Equation (8.1-6) is for
zero-memory sources
with J source symbols;
Eq. (8.1-7) uses probability estimates for the
L - 1 intensity values in
an image.

H = - a pr A rk B log2 pr A rk B
'

L-1

(8.1-7)

k=0

where variables L, rk, and pr(rk) are as defined in Sections 8.1.1 and 3.3. Because the base 2 logarithm is used, Eq. (8.1-7) is the average information per
intensity output of the imaginary intensity source in bits. It is not possible to
code the intensity'values of the imaginary source (and thus the sample image)
with fewer than H bits>pixel.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

8.1 ■ Fundamentals

■ The entropy of the image in Fig. 8.1(a) can be estimated by substituting the
intensity probabilities from Table 8.1 into Eq. (8.1-7):
'

H = -[0.25 log2 0.25 + 0.47 log2 0.47 + 0.25 log 2 0.25 + 0.03 log2 0.03]
L -[0.25(-2) + 0.47(-1.09) + 0.25(-2) + 0.03(-5.06)]
L 1.6614 bits>pixel
In a similar manner, the entropies of the images in Fig. 8.1(b) and (c) can be
shown to be 8 bits>pixel and 1.566 bits>pixel, respectively. Note that the image
in Fig. 8.1(a) appears to have the most visual information, but has almost the
lowest computed entropy—1.66 bits>pixel. The image in Fig. 8.1(b) has almost
five times the entropy of the image in (a), but appears to have about the same
(or less) visual information; and the image in Fig. 8.1(c), which seems to have
little or no information, has almost the same entropy as the image in (a). The
obvious conclusion is that the amount of entropy and thus information in an
image is far from intuitive.
■

Shannon’s first theorem
Recall that the variable-length code in Example 8.1 was able to represent the
intensities of the image in Fig. 8.1(a) using only 1.81 bits>pixel. Although this is
higher than the 1.6614 bits>pixel entropy estimate from Example 8.2, Shannon’s
first theorem—also called the noiseless coding theorem (Shannon [1948])—assures
us that the image in Fig. 8.1(a) can be represented with as few as 1.6614 bits>pixel.
To prove it in a general way, Shannon looked at representing groups of n consecutive source symbols with a single code word (rather than one code word per
source symbol) and showed that
lim B

n: q

Lavg, n
R = H
n

(8.1-8)

where Lavg, n is the average number of code symbols required to represent all
n-symbol groups. In the proof, he defined the nth extension of a zero-memory
source to be the hypothetical source that produces n-symbol blocks† using the
symbols of the original source; and computed Lavg, n by applying Eq. (8.1-4) to
the code words used to represent the n-symbol blocks. Equation (8.1-8) tells
us that Lavg, n>n can be made arbitrarily close to H by encoding infinitely long
extensions of the single-symbol source. That is, it is possible to represent the
output of a zero-memory source with an average of H information units per
source symbol.
†

The output of the nth extension is an n-tuple of symbols from the underlying single-symbol source. It
was considered a block random variable in which the probability of each n-tuple is the product of the
probabilities of its individual symbols. The entropy of the nth extension is then n times the entropy of
the single-symbol source from which it is derived.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

533

EXAMPLE 8.2:
Image entropy
estimates.

534

Chapter 8 ■ Image Compression

If we now return to the idea that an image is a “sample” of the intensity
source that produced it, a block of n source symbols corresponds to a group
of n adjacent pixels. To construct a variable-length code for n-pixel blocks,
the relative frequencies of the blocks must be computed. But the nth extension of a hypothetical intensity source with 256 intensity values has 256n possible n-pixel blocks. Even in the simple case of n = 2, a 65,536 element
histogram and up to 65,536 variable-length code words must be generated.
For n = 3, as many as 16,777,216 code words are needed. So even for small
values of n, computational complexity limits the usefulness of the extension
coding approach in practice.
Finally, we note that although Eq. (8.1-7) provides a lower bound on the
compression that can be achieved when coding statistically independent pixels
directly, it breaks down when the pixels of an image are correlated. Blocks of
correlated pixels can be coded with fewer average bits per pixel than the equation predicts. Rather than using source extensions, less correlated descriptors
(like intensity run-lengths) are normally selected and coded without extension. This was the approach used to compress Fig. 8.1(b) in Section 8.1.2. When
the output of a source of information depends on a finite number of preceding
outputs, the source is called a Markov or finite memory source.

8.1.5 Fidelity Criteria
In Section 8.1.3, it was noted that the removal of “irrelevant visual” information involves a loss of real or quantitative image information. Because information is lost, a means of quantifying the nature of the loss is needed. Two
types of criteria can be used for such an assessment: (1) objective fidelity criteria and (2) subjective fidelity criteria.
When information loss can be expressed as a mathematical function of the
input and output of a compression process, it is said to be based on an objective fidelity criterion.An example is the root-mean-square (rms) error between two images. Let f(x,y) be an input image and fN(x,y) be an approximation of f(x, y)
that results from compressing and subsequently decompressing the input. For
any value of x and y, the error e(x,y) between f(x,y) and fN(x,y) is
e(x,y) = fN(x,y) - f(x,y)

(8.1-9)

so that the total error between the two images is
N
a a C f(x,y) - f(x,y) D

M-1 N-1
x=0 y=0

where the images are of size M * N. The root-mean-square error, erms, between
f(x,y) and fN(x,y) is then the square root of the squared error averaged over the
M * N array, or
erms = B

2 1>2
1 M-1 N-1 N
f
(x,y)
f(x,y)
R
C
D
a
MN xa
=0 y=0

www.EBooksWorld.ir

(8.1-10)

8.1 ■ Fundamentals

535

If fN(x,y) is considered [by a simple rearrangement of the terms in Eq. (8.1-9)] to
be the sum of the original image f(x, y) and an error or “noise” signal e(x,y), the
mean-square signal-to-noise ratio of the output image, denoted SNR ms, can be
defined as in Section 5.8:
M-1 N-1

2
N
a a f(x,y)

SNR ms =

x=0 y=0
M-1 N-1

2
N
a a C f(x,y) - f(x,y) D

(8.1-11)

x=0 y=0

The rms value of the signal-to-noise ratio, denoted SNR rms, is obtained by taking the square root of Eq. (8.1-11).
While objective fidelity criteria offer a simple and convenient way to evaluate information loss, decompressed images are ultimately viewed by humans.
So, measuring image quality by the subjective evaluations of people is often
more appropriate. This can be done by presenting a decompressed image to a
cross section of viewers and averaging their evaluations. The evaluations may
be made using an absolute rating scale or by means of side-by-side comparisons
of f(x, y) and fN(x, y). Table 8.2 shows one possible absolute rating scale. Sideby-side comparisons can be done with a scale such as 5-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 36 to
represent the subjective evaluations 5much worse, worse, slightly worse, the
same, slightly better, better, much better6, respectively. In either case, the evaluations are based on subjective fidelity criteria.

■ Figure 8.4 shows three different approximations of the image in Fig. 8.1(a).
Using Eq. (8.1-10) with Fig. 8.1(a) for f(x, y) and the images in Figs. 8.4(a)
through (c) as fN(x,y), the computed rms errors are 5.17, 15.67, and 14.17 intensity levels, respectively. In terms of rms error—an objective fidelity criterion—
the three images in Fig. 8.4 are ranked in order of decreasing quality as
5(a), (c), (b)6.

Value

Rating

Description

1

Excellent

2

Fine

3

Passable

4

Marginal

5

Inferior

6

Unusable

An image of extremely high quality, as good as you could
desire.
An image of high quality, providing enjoyable viewing.
Interference is not objectionable.
An image of acceptable quality. Interference is not
objectionable.
An image of poor quality; you wish you could improve it.
Interference is somewhat objectionable.
A very poor image, but you could watch it. Objectionable
interference is definitely present.
An image so bad that you could not watch it.

www.EBooksWorld.ir

EXAMPLE 8.3:
Image quality
comparisons.

TABLE 8.2
Rating scale of
the Television
Allocations Study
Organization.
(Frendendall and
Behrend.)

536

Chapter 8 ■ Image Compression

a b c
FIGURE 8.4 Three approximations of the image in Fig. 8.1(a).

Figures 8.4(a) and (b) are typical of images that have been compressed
and subsequently reconstructed. Both retain the essential information of the
original image—like the spatial and intensity characteristics of its objects.
And their rms errors correspond roughly to perceived quality. Figure 8.4(a),
which is practically as good as the original image, has the lowest rms error,
while Fig. 8.4(b) has more error but noticeable degradation at the boundaries between objects. This is exactly as one would expect.
Figure 8.4(c) is an artificially generated image that demonstrates the limitations of objective fidelity criteria. Note that the image is missing large sections
of several important lines (i.e., visual information), and has small dark squares
(i.e., artifacts) in the upper right quadrant. The visual content of the image is
misleading and certainly not as accurate as the image in (b), but it has less rms
error—14.17 versus 15.67 intensity values. A subjective evaluation of the three
images using Table 8.2 might yield an excellent rating for (a), a passable or
marginal rating for (b), and an inferior of unusable rating for (c). The rms error
measure, on the other hand, ranks (c) ahead of (b).
■

8.1.6 Image Compression Models

Here, the notation
f(x, Á ) is used to
denote both f(x,y) and
f(x,y, t).

As Fig. 8.5 shows, an image compression system is composed of two distinct
functional components: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder performs compression, and the decoder performs the complementary operation of decompression. Both operations can be performed in software, as is the case in Web
browsers and many commercial image editing programs, or in a combination
of hardware and firmware, as in commercial DVD players. A codec is a device
or program that is capable of both encoding and decoding.
Input image f(x, Á ) is fed into the encoder, which creates a compressed
representation of the input. This representation is stored for later use, or transmitted for storage and use at a remote location. When the compressed representation is presented to its complementary decoder, a reconstructed output
image fN(x, Á ) is generated. In still-image applications, the encoded input and
decoder output are f(x, y) and fN(x, y), respectively; in video applications, they
www.EBooksWorld.ir

8.1 ■ Fundamentals

537

FIGURE 8.5
f(x, y)
or
f(x, y, t)

Mapper

Symbol
coder

Quantizer

Encoder

Symbol
decoder

Inverse
mapper

Compressed data
for storage
and transmission

fˆ(x, y)
or
fˆ(x, y, t)

Decoder

are f(x, y, t) and fN(x, y, t), where discrete parameter t specifies time. In general,
fN(x, Á ) may or may not be an exact replica of f(x, Á ). If it is, the compression system is called error free, lossless, or information preserving. If not, the
reconstructed output image is distorted and the compression system is referred to as lossy.

The encoding or compression process
The encoder of Fig. 8.5 is designed to remove the redundancies described in
Sections 8.1.1–8.1.3 through a series of three independent operations. In the first
stage of the encoding process, a mapper transforms f(x, Á ) into a (usually nonvisual) format designed to reduce spatial and temporal redundancy. This operation generally is reversible and may or may not reduce directly the amount of
data required to represent the image. Run-length coding (see Sections 8.1.2 and
8.2.5) is an example of a mapping that normally yields compression in the first
step of the encoding process. The mapping of an image into a set of less correlated transform coefficients (see Section 8.2.8) is an example of the opposite
case (the coefficients must be further processed to achieve compression). In
video applications, the mapper uses previous (and in some cases future) video
frames to facilitate the removal of temporal redundancy.
The quantizer in Fig. 8.5 reduces the accuracy of the mapper’s output in accordance with a pre-established fidelity criterion. The goal is to keep irrelevant
information out of the compressed representation. As noted in Section 8.1.3,
this operation is irreversible. It must be omitted when error-free compression
is desired. In video applications, the bit rate of the encoded output is often
measured (in bits>second) and used to adjust the operation of the quantizer so
that a predetermined average output rate is maintained. Thus, the visual quality of the output can vary from frame to frame as a function of image content.
In the third and final stage of the encoding process, the symbol coder of Fig. 8.5
generates a fixed- or variable-length code to represent the quantizer output and
maps the output in accordance with the code. In many cases, a variable-length
code is used. The shortest code words are assigned to the most frequently occurring quantizer output values—thus minimizing coding redundancy. This operation is reversible. Upon its completion, the input image has been processed for
the removal of each of the three redundancies described in Sections 8.1.1 to 8.1.3.
www.EBooksWorld.ir

Functional block
diagram of a
general image
compression
system.

