—Where do good ideas come from?
—What is the best length for a sentence or paragraph?
—When should the rules of grammar be obeyed and when should they be
 stretched?
—Why does one piece of writing succeed and another fail?
—How can you look at your own work and judge it fairly?

Whether you’re a student writing a paper, a businessperson writing a presentation,
a marketer writing an ad, a reporter writing a news story, or an author writing a
short story, novel, or nonfiction book, you will find tips and techniques to do it
better with



                                     100
         WAYS TO IMPROVE YOUR WRITING.
                                              BERKLEY
                               An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
                                 1745 Broadway, New York, NY 10019



                              Copyright © 1972, 2019 by Gary Provost
  Penguin Random House supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices,
promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this
book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it
 in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin Random House to
                             continue to publish books for every reader.

  BERKLEY and the BERKLEY & B colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House
                                       LLC.

                                      Ebook ISBN: 9781984805614
                                         ISBN: 9781984803689

                              Mentor mass-market edition / October 1985
                           Berkley (updated) mass-market edition / June 2019

                                 Cover art and design by Farjana Yasmin

  While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses and
  other contact information at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any
responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur after publication. Further, publisher does not have any
 control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content.

                                                Version_1
                              Gary’s Dedication


As a freelance writer I live and die by the mailbox. During the past twenty
years, I have sent and received more than forty thousand pieces of mail that
had some part of my heart attached to them. And during that time there
haven’t been more than one or two mishaps concerning the handling of my
mail. Though I have laughed at post office jokes and have made a few myself,
the fact is that the United States Postal Service has the highest success record
of any business I have ever dealt with. For that reason this book is dedicated
to the men and women of the post office at South Lancaster, Massachusetts
01561, and to postal workers everywhere.
                      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Some of the material in this book appeared in different form in Writer’s
Digest magazine. I want to thank Bill Brohaugh, Rose Adkins, and Tom Clark
at Writer’s Digest for their work on the original articles.
   And special thanks to Claudia Reilly, who edited the book at New
American Library, and to Jon Matson.
   Also I want to gratefully acknowledge permission to reprint the following
material:

   Excerpt from Dandelion Wine by Ray Bradbury. Copyright © 1975,
   Ray Bradbury. Reprinted with the permission of Doubleday and Co.

   Excerpt from The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Copyright ©
   1926, Charles Scribner’s Sons; copyright renewed 1953, Frances Scott
   Fitzgerald Lanahan. Reprinted with the permission of Charles
   Scribner’s Sons.

   Excerpt from The Sun Also Rises by Ernest Hemingway. Copyright ©
   1926, Charles Scribner’s Sons; copyright renewed 1954, Ernest
   Hemingway. Reprinted with the permission of Charles Scribner’s Sons.

   Excerpt from No Time for Sergeants by Mac Hyman. Copyright ©
   1954, Mac Hyman. Reprinted with the permission of Penguin Random
   House LLC.

   Excerpt from The Stepford Wives by Ira Levin. Copyright © 2000, Ira
   Levin. Reprinted with the permission of Penguin Random House LLC.

   Excerpt from The Last Good Kiss by James Crumley. Copyright ©
   1978, James Crumley. Reprinted with the permission of Penguin
   Random House LLC.

   Excerpt from Ping by Gail Levine-Freidus. Copyright © 1983, Gail
   Levine-Freidus.
   Excerpt from Popcorn (Bradbury Press) by Gary Provost and Gail
   Provost. Copyright © 1985, Gary Provost and Gail Provost.

   Excerpt from On Becoming a Novelist by John Gardner. Copyright ©
   1983, the Estate of John Gardner. Reprinted with the permission of
   Harper & Row.

I know Gary would want to thank his many fans for encouraging an update
for this little gem. Among those he never met: Antonio Gidi, coauthor/editor
of the recently updated legacy edition for Legal Writing Style, and Jason
Sitzes, editor/story coach and former director of WRW. Gary would be
especially grateful to editor Carol “Doc” Dougherty, his WRW student who
quickly became a good friend, currently serves as WRW’s director, and
helped to make the dream for this edition a reality. And, for her guidance and
enthusiasm, we all thank Tracy Bernstein, executive editor at Berkley.
                                                      —Gail Provost Stockwell

                                     • • •

Gary Provost’s easy-to-use handbook of proven professional techniques,
originally published in 1985, has remained in print all this time. That fact is a
testament to the author’s popularity, expertise, and ability to make learning
fun.
   With this updated edition, we have incorporated changes—mostly technical
—that have occurred during the thirty-plus years since Gary wrote the book
on his Smith Corona electronic typewriter. A Brother word processor made it
to his desk next. Then a big, clunky computer. But he missed out on the
laptops, tablets, and smartphones that were to follow, as well as the Internet’s
invaluable online research tools that we all take for granted today.
   So although the technology has been updated, we assure you that Gary’s
generous advice, humor, and voice have been left intact.
                                                              —Carol Dougherty,
                    Writers’ Retreat Workshop student, teacher, current director
                       Gail Provost Stockwell, cofounder (with Gary) of WRW
                         CONTENTS

TITLE PAGE
COPYRIGHT
DEDICATION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION

I. Nine Ways to Improve Your Writing When You’re Not Writing
     1. Get Some Reference Books
     2. Expand Your Vocabulary
     3. Improve Your Spelling
     4. Read
     5. Take a Class
     6. Eavesdrop
     7. Research
     8. Write in Your Head
     9. Choose a Time and Place

II. Nine Ways to Overcome Writer’s Block
     1. Copy Something
     2. Keep a Journal
     3. Talk About What You’re Writing
     4. Touch Your Toes
     5. Do Writing Exercises
     6. Organize Your Material
     7. Make a List
     8. Picture a Reader
     9. Ask Yourself Why You Are Writing

III. Five Ways to Write a Strong Beginning
     1. Find a Slant
     2. Write a Strong Lead
     3. Don’t Make Promises You Can’t Keep
     4. Set a Tone and Maintain It
    5. Begin at the Beginning

IV. Nine Ways to Save Time and Energy
     1. Use Pyramid Construction
     2. Use Topic Sentences
     3. Write Short Paragraphs
     4. Use Transitional Phrases
     5. Don’t Explain When You Don’t Have To
     6. Use Bridge Words
     7. Avoid Wordiness
     8. Steal
     9. Stop Writing When You Get to the End

V. Ten Ways to Develop Style
     1. Think About Style
     2. Listen to What You Write
     3. Mimic Spoken Language
     4. Vary Sentence Length
     5. Vary Sentence Construction
     6. Write Complete Sentences
     7. Show, Don’t Tell
     8. Keep Related Words Together
     9. Use Parallel Construction
     10. Don’t Force a Personal Style

VI. Twelve Ways to Give Your Words Power
     1. Use Short Words
     2. Use Dense Words
     3. Use Familiar Words
     4. Use Active Verbs
     5. Use Strong Verbs
     6. Use Specific Nouns
     7. Use the Active Voice . . . Most of the Time
     8.Say Things in a Positive Way . . . Most of the Time
     9. Be Specific
     10. Use Statistics
     11. Provide Facts
     12. Put Emphatic Words at the End

VII. Eleven Ways to Make People Like What You Write
    1. Make Yourself Likable
    2. Write About People
    3. Show Your Opinion
    4. Obey Your Own Rules
    5. Use Anecdotes
    6. Use Examples
    7. Name Your Sources
    8. Provide Useful Information
    9. Use Quotations
    10. Use Quotes
    11. Create a Strong Title

VIII. Ten Ways to Avoid Grammatical Errors
    1. Respect the Rules of Grammar
    2. Do Not Change Tenses
    3. Know How to Use the Possessive Case
    4. Make Verbs Agree with Their Subjects
    5. Fix Dangling Modifiers
    6. Avoid Shifts in Pronoun Forms
    7. Do Not Split Infinitives
    8. Beware These Common Mistakes
    9. Be Sensitive to Changes in the Language
    10. Prefer Good Writing to Good Grammar

IX. Six Ways to Avoid Punctuation Errors
     1. Use Orthodox Punctuation
     2. Know When to Use a Comma
     3. Know When to Use a Semicolon
     4. Know When to Use a Colon
     5. Use Exclamation Points Only When Exclaiming and Question Marks
        Only When Asking Questions
     6. Know How to Use Quotation Marks

X. Twelve Ways to Avoid Making Your Reader Hate You
    1. Avoid Jargon
    2. Avoid Clichés
    3. Avoid Parentheses
    4. Avoid Footnotes
    5. Don’t Use Transitions to Conceal Information
    6. Don’t Acknowledge When You Should Explain
    7. Don’t Hide Behind Your Words
    8. Don’t Intrude
    9. Don’t Play Word Games
    10. Don’t Play the Tom Wolfe Game
    11. Don’t Play the Mystery Game
    12. Don’t Cheat

XI. Seven Ways to Edit Yourself
     1. Read Your Work Out Loud
     2. Cut Unnecessary Words
     3. Think About What You Have Written
     4. Ask Yourself These Questions
     5. Follow These Rules of Form for Titles
     6. Prepare a Perfect Manuscript
     7. Use Common Sense
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
                        INTRODUCTION

This book will teach you how to write better love letters.
   It will also teach you how to write better books, short stories, magazine
articles, letters to the editor, business proposals, sermons, poems, novels,
parole requests, church newsletters, songs, memos, essays, term papers,
theses, graffiti, blog posts, advertisements, and shopping lists.
   If your writing does not improve after you read this book, you have not
failed. I have. It is the writer’s job, not the reader’s, to see that writing
accomplishes whatever goal the writer has set for it.
   One bit of advice I will give you in this book is “Make yourself likable.”
Readers who like you are more inclined to trust you, to laugh at your jokes,
cry over your anguish, sign the petition, buy the product, put the check in the
mail, or do whatever else it is you are trying to get them to do through your
writing.
   I want you to like me so that you will follow my advice—and recommend
my book to your friends. And that’s important for you to know because it
means I am on your side. I’m not here to tell you that you’re writing wrong.
I’m here to show you how to write right.
                                                                      —Gary Provost

                                      • • •

Gary Provost’s popular book for writers was published in 1985 and has never
been out of print. While there have been additional printings, a revised
version is due. The following updates address and easily incorporate the
changes that have taken place in the past thirty-plus years.
   When Gary wrote this, most writers used typewriters or, if they were lucky,
word processors. Some still wrote with pen and paper and hired typists for the
finished copies. Writers who were not technology hobbyists did not own
desktop computers, laptops did not exist, and the only tablets available were
the paper kind.
   Prior to August 1991, the month the World Wide Web was launched,
creating the Internet as we know it today, research meant trips to the library, a
far more laborious and time-consuming method.
   Gary did make a reference in Chapter Eight to the changing use of gender-
specific pronouns, and did write with awareness of the issue.
   These three issues involved the greatest area of updates in the book. Not all
references to the use of paper and pen and other semi-anachronisms have
been deleted. Some writers still use them. All ways of working are
represented. The same holds true for reference and research work. While the
Internet and online tools are invaluable, there are still some reference
materials writers may prefer to keep on hand in hard copy.
   Examples within the book, for the most part, are originals from Gary. As
long as each point being made remains accurate, I saw no reason to change
any example, including previously published work of others for which
permissions had already been granted.
   Gary wrote with a distinctive voice. His humor and personality shone
through his writing, and for anyone who ever heard him speak, you can hear
his voice in the words. Sometimes he used colloquialisms that may sound like
questionable English. He did that with intention, and I left those alone. They
are his voice, and I love them.
   Gary wrote this book with the same generosity and humor that he brought
to every writing workshop I ever attended. I have tried to approach this
updated edition with the same spirit. He was a wonderful teacher, and the fact
that this book continues to sell is a testament to that fact.
                    —Carol Dougherty, WRW student, teacher, current director
                              1
   NINE WAYS TO IMPROVE YOUR
WRITING WHEN YOU’RE NOT WRITING


1. Get Some Reference Books
2. Expand Your Vocabulary
3. Improve Your Spelling
4. Read
5. Take a Class
6. Eavesdrop
7. Research
8. Write in Your Head
9. Choose a Time and Place
1. Get Some Reference Books


   It would be a shame to bring an entire writing project to a halt just because
you didn’t know how to spell gyroscope or schnapps. So get a dictionary and
keep it in the room where you write, no more than an arm’s length away. In
fact, get two. Get a hardcover for its comprehensiveness and a paperback for
convenience. If you prefer your reference books in digital format, you can get
an e-book version or use an online app.
   Also, get an encyclopedia. If you can’t afford a big set, get a single-volume
encyclopedia. If you can’t afford a subscription to Encyclopædia Britannica
or the like online, there are free online encyclopedias such as
encyclopedia.com. You can use Wikipedia as a resource for background
information or to point you to other sources, but it should not be cited as a
source. It is created and edited by volunteers.
   And get a thesaurus. Thesaurus means “treasury”; the thesaurus you buy
will be a treasury of synonyms, words that are close in meaning to the one
you want. It is a book that will lead you to that perfect word you know is
loitering on the outskirts of your brain.
   Roget’s Thesaurus is arranged in two sections. The first section contains
hundreds of clusters of related words and phrases. The second section is an
index listing all the words in the first section alphabetically and telling you
where they appear in that section.
   Let’s say, for example, that in a letter you want to assure the owner of the
company you work for that you will most certainly try to recover the four
billion dollars you lost on the papier-mâché deal, but recover isn’t quite the
word you want to use, and you’re not sure what is. So you whip out your
pocket edition of Roget’s Thesaurus, turn to the index, and look up recover.
There you’ll find the numbers 660, 775, and 790. You turn to cluster 660 and
you find recover along with its cousins rally, revive, pull through, reappear,
and others. If you don’t like anything you find there, you turn to the other
numbers, and the thesaurus will lead you to redeem, get back, salvage, and so
on.
   You can find thesauruses in paperback and hardcover, as well as online, and
Roget’s is not the only one. I do not recommend the ones that are arranged
solely in dictionary form. They are easier to use but only about twelve percent
as useful.
   After you have acquired a dictionary, an encyclopedia, and a thesaurus, you
can acquire other reference books as time, taste, and money allow. Their
importance depends largely on what sort of writing you do and how much.
   Here are a few reference books you might find useful.
   Finding Facts Fast by Alden Todd is a good reference book for any writer
who has to do research.
   The World Almanac and Book of Facts will tell you how many tomatoes
were grown in New Jersey last year and a good many other things you might
not find anywhere else.
   The Book of Lists by David Wallechinsky, Irving Wallace, and Amy
Wallace is fun to read and rich with useful information.
   An effective online resource is refseek.com, which is a web search engine
that acts as a directory of encyclopedias, directories, almanacs, and other
reference resources.
   The Careful Writer by Theodore M. Bernstein is an excellent grammar
guide.



2. Expand Your Vocabulary

   Everybody has heard tips for improving vocabulary. Learn a new word in
the morning and use it three times before sunset and it’s yours, etc. There are
many books that will help you stretch your vocabulary. The best-known one is
Thirty Days to a More Powerful Vocabulary by Wilfred Funk and Norman
Lewis. Read that book or one like it.
   There are websites such as vocabulary.com and lingualift .com if you prefer
to work with your vocabulary online. For those on the go, apps such as
Vocabulary Builder by Magoosh and Vocab24 by WiFi Study are free and
highly rated for improving your vocabulary.
   But the most important vocabulary for the writer is not the one that will
take in uxorious tomorrow and soubrette the next day. It’s the one he or she
already has. For the writer of average intelligence and education, learning
new words is much less important than learning to use easily the words he or
she already knows.
   Think for a minute. How many synonyms can you come up with for the
noun plan?
   There are program, itinerary, scheme, design, agenda, outline, and
blueprint. If you concentrated for a minute, you might have come up with ten
words that you already knew. But how many of them would have come easily
to mind while you were writing a letter to the boss about your potentially
lucrative new . . . uh . . . plan?
   The only way to make your vocabulary more accessible is to use it. If you
want all those short but interesting words waiting at the front of your brain
when you need them, you must move them to the front of your brain before
you need them.
   Stop to think about other word possibilities when you write, and eventually
they will come so quickly that you won’t have to stop.
   Pause before you speak. Then insert some of those good but neglected
words.
   And when you drive home from work at night, pick out an object along the
road and see how many synonyms you can think of before you pass it. There’s
a house over there. But it’s also a dwelling, an abode, a building, a bungalow,
perhaps, or maybe a cottage. It’s a home for somebody, it’s headquarters for a
family, and it’s a shelter and a structure, too.



3. Improve Your Spelling

   There aren’t many firm rules that apply to the spelling of English words.
Mostly, good spelling is a matter of forming the right mental associations and
developing an eye for words that look a little weird.
   In the dictionary, look up any word that you’re not sure of. If you have
been misspelling it, write it correctly ten times. Invent a visual image for the
correct spelling. For example: The Sahara desert only has one s, like Sahara,
but the dessert after a meal has a second s, like a second helping.
   How will better spelling improve your writing? Well, for one thing, you
won’t write desert when you mean dessert. More important, it will improve
your writing by reducing the number of times you annoy the reader. A few
misspelled words will jar the reader’s concentration, and a lot of misspelled
words will wreck your credibility. Right or wrong, the reader will perceive
you as . . . well, stupid, to put it bluntly. If you don’t have the respect of the
reader, your writing will not work.
   Spell check is available in most word processing programs; however, it
does have its limitations. So although it catches many mistakes that are
ungrammatical, spell check is imperfect, missing some mistakes and marking
others as incorrect when they are not. If you spell a word correctly, spell
check will sometimes let it go, even if the usage is incorrect. Examples are
principle vs. principal, there vs. their vs. they’re, and dear vs. deer. You need
to know how the word should be spelled so you can check the spell checker.

              Fifty of the Most Commonly Misspelled Words
acceptable
acknowledgment
apology
appetite
architect
assassinate
autumn
calendar
changeable
conscience
conscious
correspondence
criticism
deceive
discernible
embarrass
eminent
existence
fascinate
grateful
hygiene
imaginable
immediately
irrelevant
jewelry
judgment
lovable
miscellaneous
mischievous
mortgage
necessarily
occasionally
occurrence
omission
orchestra
potatoes
professor
pseudonym
religious
rhythmic
scissors
syllable
tragedy
umbrella
vanilla
vengeance
weird
wholesome
youthful
zealot



4. Read

   If you are an architect, you should certainly read architectural literature. If
you are in computers, you must keep up with what’s being written about
terabytes, hacking, and the latest operating systems. Reading the books and
trade magazines as well as checking out the key websites of your particular
field will not only keep you informed; it will show you how experienced
writers are turning the jargon and the complexities of your vocation into
readable prose.
   But no matter what your field of expertise, you should also read books,
magazines, and newspapers designed for the general reader.
   Though the daily paper and online news sites contain much that is swill,
they also contain some good writing. From them you can learn to write leanly,
to get to the point, and to compress several facts into a single clear sentence.
   If you read mysteries and romances, you will discover how writers create
curiosity and build tension. You will also learn how to construct an event, a
person, or a place with just a few well-chosen words.
   Read novels. You will see how words can be used to communicate
subtleties and stir emotions, how words can be arranged one way to make you
worry, another to make you laugh.
   Read magazine articles and you will see how quotes are pared down from
lengthy interviews until they contain nothing but the words that matter. Notice
how opinions are supported by facts. Watch to see how the writer makes his
or her points by calling on outside help such as scientific reports, quotes from
books, surveys, etc. Then go to the online version and see whether they have a
longer version so you can see what was edited for the print copy.
   Read. And listen to what you read. Listen for the sound of the language, the
music. Note the punctuation, the spelling, the logical progression of
information. And find the things that fail, also. Listen to how two similar
sounds close together can cause a disturbing noise in your head. Hear how the
use of the wrong word wakes you from your reading spell. Be a critical reader
and look upon all that you read as a lesson in good writing.




5. Take a Class

   If you don’t believe that good writing can be taught, you shouldn’t be
reading this book. If you do believe good writing can be taught, you could
benefit from a class.
   You don’t have to sign up for a three-credit course at the local university.
You can find a creative writing or English composition course in most adult
education and extension programs or online.
   There are specific courses designed for particular types of writers. For
example, there are business writing courses that thoroughly cover the formal
English required in business correspondence. A course in nonfiction writing
will provide you with some research techniques that you wouldn’t get
elsewhere. And a course in writing for television would be invaluable if that’s
your interest, as there are many rules of form a scriptwriter must follow.
   Generally, a writing course is as good or as bad as the teacher. Good
teachers and bad teachers are found at all levels, so ask around.
   Whether it’s a course at the local high school or a course at Harvard, in my
opinion you should steer clear of any teacher who speaks with a British accent
but has never been to England and any teacher who insists you must read
Moby Dick before writing your first paper. Point yourself toward the eager,
unpretentious teacher who is actually publishing stories, articles, and books.
   “But why,” you ask, “should I take a writing class at all after reading a
wonderful book like this?”
  Good question. Three answers.
  1. With a teacher and other students reading your work, you will be better
able to learn what your particular faults and virtues are.
  2. Knowing that the class or teacher is going to read your work, you will
work harder at making your writing good.
  3. Your own writing mistakes are often invisible to you, but they will
become obvious when you see them in the work of fellow students.




6. Eavesdrop

   Be nosy. Listen to conversations on the bus, in the elevator. Screen out the
words sometimes and listen only to the music. Tune in to teenagers’
conversations, and you’ll pick up the latest slang. Pretend to be reading on the
park bench, and you’ll hear how words are used to convey more than they
mean. Find out what people are talking about, what they care about. All of
this will help you to communicate more effectively through your writing.
   This passage from my book The Dorchester Gas Tank is based on a
conversation I overheard at a diner in Burlington, Vermont.

      “My neighbor’s daughter has just got back from Sweden,” Bernice says.
   Her words are slightly muffled because she has stopped in her
   conversation with Dora to slice open a roll of Italian bread and stuff it
   with provolone cheese, several thick slices of baloney and enough
   tomatoes, onions, etc. to sink a ship. Now she chomps on it as if food will
   soon be obsolete.
      “I didn’t know they went to Europe,” Bernice’s sister says.
      “Well it’s not really Europe. It’s in Scandinavia. It’s a Danish country.”
      “Oh yes,” Dora says, “the Danish country is very nice, but those people
   don’t like to talk to outsiders.”
      “Well, it’s a sub-language they speak,” Bernice says. “It’s like German,
   not fully developed.”
      “Very guttural,” Dora says.
      “My neighbor’s daughter says some of them are really awful. She went
   to a cathedral and one of them had stolen a crown from a statue of the
   Blessed Mother.”
      “From the Blessed Mother? That’s disgraceful.”
7. Research

   Do your fingers sometimes freeze over the keyboard? Does the blank page
seem to stare back at you with an accusing eye? The problem could be that
you haven’t gathered enough information. You haven’t gotten the facts.
   Almost everything you will ever write must be built on a foundation of
factual information. That includes opinion pieces and most certainly includes
stories, plays, and novels.
   Before you write, track down the bits of information you are going to need.
Get the prices you must quote, the names of people you will mention. Find
out when it’s going to happen, where it will be, who’s going to be speaking,
and whether or not dogs are allowed. You cannot write securely on any
subject unless you have gathered far more information than you will use.
   Here are four ways to get facts.

       1. Look it up. If the facts are not in the books on your shelf, try
    looking them up online or using library resources. Between libraries and
    the Internet, you have access to just about every piece of information in
    the world, though in some cases the information might have been printed
    only in Swahili. In that case, you can use the Internet to help you do a
    quick translation.
       2. Ask somebody. Who has the information you need? Is it the chair of
    the canvassing committee? Is it the president of the company? Is it the
    president’s executive assistant?
       Ask yourself, “Who would know?” Then go directly to the most
    logical and best-informed people. And if anybody begins an answer with
    “Well, gee, Harry, I think maybe that now that you ask, let me see . . .”
    ask somebody else.
       3. Observe it. Sometimes the best way to acquire facts is to conduct an
    experiment. Do you need to know how many miles it is from the center
    of town to the church? Drive from downtown to the church and check
    your mileage. Will people in wheelchairs be able to attend the dinner at
    the Old Timer’s Café? Go to the Old Timer’s, have a drink. And while
    you are there, look for ramps, measure the doorways, check the
    restrooms. Although most of these details are accessible online, they are
    not always updated in a timely manner. Sometimes it’s best to find out
    for yourself.
       Of course, there’s not always time for this sort of thing. In an
    emergency, ask somebody. Like a waitress at the Old Timer’s, or the
     minister who’s got to drive downtown to put the collection in the bank.
        4. Speak to the reference librarian. Most libraries offer a reference
     service. Use it. When you need information and you don’t know where
     to find it, ask the librarian. He or she will find it or direct you to the
     source. Many libraries will handle reference questions over the phone or
     by e-mail, and that can spare you a good deal of frustration when your
     writing comes to a standstill because you don’t know where George
     Gershwin was born. Keep the library’s phone number and e-mail address
     handy. But remember that librarians are the servants of ignorance, not of
     laziness. Call the librarian if you need to know the biggest crops in
     Bolivia in the twentieth century, but don’t call to ask how Bolivia is
     spelled.



8. Write in Your Head

   When I was a reporter for a local newspaper, I used to leave a school
committee or municipal meeting around eleven p.m. in Hudson and drive
eight miles to the newspaper office in Marlboro, where I would write my
stories for the next day’s edition.
   Often I arrived after other reporters. But almost invariably I would write
my stories, hand them in, and drive home before the others. I was able to do
this, not because I am a faster typist, but because I started writing before I got
to the office. I wrote the first draft in my head during the drive to Marlboro. In
my mind I planned the lead, decided what information I could ignore, and
organized my material. By the time I reached the office, I knew what I wanted
to write, and when I sat down at the typewriter, it was like pushing the “play”
button on a tape recorder. Everything I had recorded in my brain came out.
   So if you have a writing job, write in your head. Clear up the
inconsistencies while you’re brushing your teeth. Get your thoughts organized
while you’re driving to work. Think of a slant during lunch. And most
important, come up with a beginning, a lead, so that you won’t end up staring
at your keyboard as if it had just arrived from another galaxy. If you have
spent time writing in your head, you’ll have a head start. The writing will
come easier, and you’ll finish sooner.
9. Choose a Time and Place

   For most writers the hardest part of any writing project is getting started. I
often begin by staring at the blank page as if it is some vile substance that has
been spilled on my desk. Then, no matter how alert I was when I arrived at
the keyboard, I become almost terminally drowsy. My eyes droop. My
shoulders sag. Finally, I begin to think, “Well, maybe I should take a little nap
first; then I’ll be well rested for writing.” Usually my puritan conscience
cancels that plan. So I take on the expression of a man who has just been
strapped into a dentist’s chair and begin to write. As soon as I have words on
paper, agony departs. I love writing. It’s getting started that I abhor.
   I tell you this so that you won’t feel alone. You probably go through similar
hell before you write. Almost everybody does. The way to eliminate most of
these traumas is to write in large blocks of time rather than to try to write for
ten minutes here and there. Look at your schedule. When will you be left
undisturbed for an hour or two? Can you lock the door? Turn off the phone?
You will get more writing done in an undisturbed hour than you would in a
dozen ten-minute spurts.
   It is also important to find a quiet place to write. Few people can write their
best when the phone is ringing and the kids are clamoring for whatever it is
that makes kids clamor. A den in a noisy house would probably produce less
writing than the backseat of a car in a quiet garage. So find someplace quiet.
Is there a day when everybody else is out of the house? Does a friend have a
cottage? Does your company have an empty office?
   If you can’t find a quiet place to write, use earplugs.
                            2
  NINE WAYS TO OVERCOME WRITER’S
              BLOCK


1. Copy Something
2. Keep a Journal
3. Talk About What You’re Writing
4. Touch Your Toes
5. Do Writing Exercises
6. Organize Your Material
7. Make a List
8. Picture a Reader
9. Ask Yourself Why You Are Writing
1. Copy Something


   Yes, copy. From time to time take a few paragraphs from something that
you enjoyed reading and sit down at the computer or with a notebook and
copy them word for word. You will find yourself suddenly aware of the
choices the writer made. You will look at the work from the writer’s point of
view. In time you will feel like an insider, and you will say, “I know why he
chose this word; I know why he made two short sentences here instead of one
long one.” You will become more intimate with the writer’s words and with
words in general, and your own writing will be better for it.
   If you don’t have a favorite passage to copy, use this one from The Great
Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald. It’s a favorite of mine.

     His heart beat faster and faster as Daisy’s white face came up to his
  own. He knew that when he kissed this girl, and forever wed his
  unutterable visions to her perishable breath, his mind would never romp
  again like the mind of God. So he waited, listening for a moment longer to
  the tuning fork that had been struck upon a star. Then he kissed her. At his
  lips’ touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the incarnation was
  complete.
     Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimentality, I was
  reminded of something—an elusive rhythm, a fragment of lost words, that I
  had heard somewhere a long time ago. For a moment a phrase tried to
  take shape in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb man’s, as though
  there was more struggling upon them than a wisp of startled air. But they
  made no sound, and what I had almost remembered was uncommunicable
  forever.




2. Keep a Journal

  There is no one right way to keep a journal. But if you have some sort of
notebook or diary that you return to often with your written thoughts,
opinions, observations, and various bits of wit, you will have a place in which
to exercise your writing muscles.
   You will learn to describe succinctly and clearly the events of your daily
life. You will learn to pluck from each event just the details needed to create a
sense of the whole. If you keep a journal, you will grow as a writer, and you
will find that sooner or later, no matter what you have to write professionally,
your personal experiences will play a part.
   Keep in mind, however, that a journal can be far more than just a diary. You
can take notes from a conversation. You can take notes while you’re reading,
or eating at a restaurant. You can even take notes while you’re watching
television. I know of one woman who took notes while watching the National
Cheerleading Competition on TV. She learned all the terms, and with the
information she gathered, she was able to make a story about a cheerleader
convincing.



3. Talk About What You’re Writing

   When you’re looking for a job, you tell as many people as you can. There’s
always the chance that one of your friends knows about a suitable job
opening, or that someone knows a guy who knows a guy, etc. Same thing
when you want to buy a house. You tell people what size house you’re
looking for, how much you can spend, and what kind of neighbors you can’t
stand. You do this because maybe somebody has heard about a house you’d
want to buy. In effect, by telling people what you need, you plug into a huge
computer loaded with all the relevant information your friends have
accumulated.
   When you have a story to write, plug into that computer. Talk about your
story. Tell people your subject and your particular slant. Chances are your
friend Karen read a book last week that had a chapter on your subject, your
cousin Louie might send you an appropriate newspaper clipping, somebody
else might remember a fitting quote from George Bernard Shaw, and your
brother James might remember something significant that he heard when he
was in prison.




4. Touch Your Toes
   Do a little warm-up exercise before you write. If your toes are too far away
to touch, then stretch your arms or dance or jump up and down. Whatever.
James Michener actually went into physical training like a boxer before he
began a book, so the least you can do is take a few deep breaths, put your
pulse rate into second gear, and deliver a supply of oxygen to the brain. All of
this will improve the clarity of your thinking and the quality of your energy.
   Also, do not continue to write after you become fatigued. A tired writer at
the keyboard is in danger of writing drivel. If your eyes begin to droop and
your head wobbles, stand up and do some more exercise. That should
rejuvenate you. If it doesn’t, take a nap.




5. Do Writing Exercises

  Just as you need to get your body warmed up to run, you need a little
writing exercise before starting a writing project.
  A writing exercise can be almost anything that turns thoughts into words.
Make a list of ten rhyming words. Describe the inside of a Ping-Pong ball.
There are many online resources that offer free writing exercises and prompts.
But whatever you do, do it in a noncritical way. Turn off the editor in your
head. The exercise is not supposed to be polished prose any more than a
warm-up run is supposed to set a world record.



6. Organize Your Material

   Certainly there is such a thing as being overorganized. Some writers
organize their material so thoroughly that everything they write comes out
looking like a hardware catalog. Your outline, whatever its form, should
contain enough slack for creativity and space for new thoughts on your
subject.
   But you should organize the material. Organizing will help lock in the logic
of what you say, and it will speed the writing process. Organizing will help to
create an overall unity in your story as well as several interior unities.
   There is no one right way to organize material for a story. Organization
depends on the nature of the work and, more importantly, on what works for
you. So I cannot offer you the best way to organize material. But I will give
you a few tips:

         Create a list of questions about your subject before you begin
    research, and keep related questions together. Go to many different
    sources for answers—even go to many sources for answers to a single
    question. Several answers to the same question are compelling when
    they are similar and fascinating when they are not.
         Gather much more material than you will use. Just as high water
    pressure makes more water flow faster, the greater weight of material
    you have gathered will make the words flow faster.
         As you create written material, whether you are photocopying at the
    library, transcribing taped interviews, or simply scribbling notes, write
    on one side of the paper only. That way you can slice up your material
    with a pair of scissors and rearrange it any way you want. While there
    are many computer programs to help writers organize and edit, you
    might be one who prefers to print out and work on hard copy.



7. Make a List

   Some writers will not write a magazine article until they have constructed
an outline that is longer than the article they intend to write. Other writers
begin with no outline at all, though they probably have a vague outline in
mind.
   How long or detailed your outline is depends on the scope of what you
have to write and how secure you are with the material. But an outline is just
a list of elements you want to put into your writing, and for any story or
article you should make some sort of list, even if it’s just three words
scribbled on a scrap of paper. Write some key words for the issues you want
to cover, the facts you want to point to, the questions you want to pose.
Glance at the list as you work. This will help you decide what to write next.
   If, for example, you want to write a letter to your lawyer describing the
skullduggery your husband has been up to since the divorce agreement was
signed, you might scribble a list that looks like this:

     1. Cheated me on the car payments.
     2. Sends support checks late.
     3. Tells the kids lies.

   Even if you are writing something short, such as a press release, it’s a good
idea to make a list of essential elements. Making a checklist: “Time. Date.
Place. Price.” Newspaper offices are always getting press releases that don’t
mention what time the pancake breakfast at the Boys’ Club begins.




8. Picture a Reader

   Do you know who your reader is? Is your story going to be read by a
professor who knows everything but has very little time? Or is the reader a
layperson with no knowledge of your specialty? A little girl, perhaps? An
immigrant?
   Before you write, figure out whom you are trying to reach. Who is the
reader and what does he or she know?
   To write is not necessarily to communicate. Communication occurs in the
mind of the reader, and if that reader is not familiar with your terms and your
concepts, you might as well write them in Latvian. The computer terms that
are impressive in a letter to your software engineer will be gobbledygook in a
sales brochure aimed at people who have never used computers.
   Remember that when you write, the language you have to work with is not
your entire vocabulary, but only that portion of it that you share with the
reader. Just because you speak Portuguese doesn’t mean you should pepper
your story with Portuguese phrases. This reminder goes not just for words but
for historical allusions and the like. When you write, don’t think about how
smart you are; think about how smart your reader is. To do that you must
visualize him or her. Imagine your reader in the room with you. What is his
education? What are his attitudes? How important is this particular story to
him? Write as if you were in conversation with your readers. Listen to the
dialogue that would occur. Are your readers going to stop you and say, “Wait
a minute. Wait a minute. What’s a grumdocle?” If they are, then don’t use
grumdocle, or explain it when you do.



9. Ask Yourself Why You Are Writing
   Do not write until you know why you are writing. What are your goals?
Are you trying to make readers laugh? Are you trying to persuade them to
buy a product? Are you trying to advise them? To prove an argument? To
inform them so that they can make a decision?
   If you cannot answer the question “Why am I writing this?” then you
cannot wisely choose words, provide facts, include or exclude humor. You
must know what job you want done before you can pick the tools to do it.
And if you cannot state clearly at least one reason for writing your story,
article, or paper . . . don’t write it.
                                3
      FIVE WAYS TO WRITE A STRONG
              BEGINNING


1. Find a Slant
2. Write a Strong Lead
3. Don’t Make Promises You Can’t Keep
4. Set a Tone and Maintain It
5. Begin at the Beginning
1. Find a Slant


   Do not try to write everything about your subject. All subjects are
inexhaustible. If you try to write on every aspect of your subject, you will
ramble. You will get lost in the writing, your wastebasket will overflow, and
you will become a crazy person. Tie yourself to a specific idea about your
subject, some aspect that is manageable. That aspect is called the slant. Here
are some examples.


              Unslanted Idea                          Slanted Idea

Stained Glass Windows                   The History of Stained Glass Windows
                                        How to Photograph Stained Glass
                                        Windows
                                        Stained Glass Windows on Essex Street:
                                        Beauty in the City

Absenteeism                             The Cost of Absenteeism in This
                                        Corporation
The Vietnam War                         How Much Did Vietnam Cost Us?
                                        What We Learned from Vietnam
                                        The Vietnam War: Is It Really Over?




2. Write a Strong Lead

   There is no precise definition of the lead. It can be the first sentence, the
first paragraph, even the first several paragraphs of your article or story. The
lead is whatever it takes to lead your readers so deeply into your story or
article that they will not turn back unless you stray from the path you have put
them on.
   Here are two leads that I have used:
      On a clear day in Salem you can stand in front of the Peabody Museum
   and stare down Essex Street all the way to the Hawthorne Boulevard. And,
   if you’re in luck, you might see something black coming around the corner,
   something black and bewildering, floating, like a hole in the sky growing
   larger as it comes toward you. For an instant it is as disturbing as a rustle
   in the night. Don’t be concerned. It is only Laurie Cabot.

    John E. Rock kills people for their own good.
    “It’s all hypothetical, of course,” he says, waving a hand at his
   MacBook in the Framingham office of Rock Insurance.

   Though the term “lead” is usually associated with nonfiction, the lead in
fiction is just as important. Here is how Gail Levine-Freidus began her novel
for children Popcorn:

   You know how sometimes you suddenly get the feeling that someone is
   watching every move you make? The feeling sort of sneaks up on you and
   gives you the creeps, whatever they are. Well that’s exactly how I felt in Mr.
   Pettigrew’s English class just as I was starting to work on the last section
   of our test.

   A lead should be provocative. It should have energy, excitement, an
implicit promise that something is going to happen or that some interesting
information will be revealed. It should create curiosity, get the reader asking
questions.
   The character of a good lead depends largely on the nature and length of
what you have written. A 500-word lead in an 800-word story is not a good
lead, but it could be a great lead in a 3,000-word story.
   Your lead should give readers something to care about before it gives them
dry background information. “Something to care about” usually means one of
two things. Either you give the readers information that affects them directly,
or you give them a human being with whom they can identify.
   Don’t begin a story in the company newsletter like this:

   On March 27 the Board of Directors met at the Holiday Inn in Podunk. All
   but two members were present. John Burdick of the Tymecomp Agency
   presented the results of his time and productivity study. Mr. Burdick has
   spent six months in the four plants surveying daily production, employee
   attendance records, and overhead costs. He has spoken to employees and
   personnel managers. He described the effectiveness of a variety of work
   schedules, and on his recommendation the board voted unanimously to put
   the company on a four-day workweek, effective June 1.

  Employees would have to read the whole first paragraph before they found
what the story had to do with them. Most employees would not have
bothered.
  The provocative information, the information that will hook the reader and
compel him to keep reading, is at the end of the paragraph. It should be
moved to the front, and the lead should be:

   On June 1 the company will go to a four-day workweek.

  This next lead is the opening of my book about Las Vegas, High Stakes.
Instead of loading the opening with impersonal background material, I
brought my story immediately to life by giving the reader something to care
about. Note the two important elements in the lead: I made it visible—I
showed the reader something; and I made it human—I showed the reader
what the topic of the book meant to a real person: me.

   In the spring of 1990 my friend Frank Strunk took me to Las Vegas. He
   lured me into a casino, my first time, his zillionth, and introduced me to the
   fine points of blackjack and craps. Even before my second $100 bill had
   been poked down into the darkness of the drop box under crap table
   number five at the Flamingo Hilton, I knew that I had found the missing
   piece in my life.

   A lead like that will make your reader want to keep reading.
   One common mistake you should be aware of is the writing of two or three
leads in the same story. Often a writer creates a good lead and then repeats all
the information in the second paragraph, and again in the third.
   This is from an unpublished article on dog parks:

      Dog parks are a great place to exercise and socialize your pet. They are
   often fenced in, so the dogs can safely run off-leash and play to their
   hearts’ content. As long as owners clean up after their pets and don’t allow
   aggressive behavior, a dog park can be a canine paradise.
      Buster the beagle was a shy, overweight couch potato before his owner
   discovered the Beagleville dog park. Thanks to the free dog-park manners
   classes offered by local volunteers, Buster lost his fear of other dogs as
   well as his excess weight. His daily visits to the dog park are the highlight
   of the day for Buster and his owner, thanks to the well-trained pals with
   whom he plays.

   The second paragraph of that article would have made the better lead. It
contains all the information in the first paragraph plus a specific statement of
interest to the reader. If the writer had inserted the phrase “safe environment
and” before “well-trained pals” in the second paragraph, the first paragraph
could have been tossed in the wastebasket.




3. Don’t Make Promises You Can’t Keep

   Science has found a cure for cancer.

   Is that a good lead? It is if science has found a cure for cancer. But it’s not a
good lead if the writer goes on to write, “Of course, nothing is definite yet,”
and “Dr. Inman’s theories have not been fully tested,” and “The serum has
never been tried on human beings.” Then the lead becomes a trick, a
dishonest way of getting the readers into the story, and they will feel cheated
after reading the article.
   A lead is not strong if it does not deliver on the promises it makes.
Anybody can write a lead that will attract attention, but if the lead is not
supported by what follows, it will do more harm than good.




4. Set a Tone and Maintain It

   Almost every arena of activity conveys some message about the tone or
mood in which it is to be experienced. You are not expected to laugh out loud
at a hanging, but it’s okay to laugh at a Seinfeld rerun. You shouldn’t scream
when you find a great bargain at Macy’s, but it’s okay to scream at the
carnival when the Tilt-A-Whirl spins you around. (Throwing up is also more
acceptable there than at Macy’s.) In life, mixed messages about tone, such as
gag napkins at a wake, are disturbing. The same is true in reading.
   In your opening paragraph you set a tone. Your choice of words, your
arrangement of those words, and your choice of information all convey to the
reader some message about the tone of the story. In some way the writer, you,
makes an announcement such as “This is urgent,” or “Let’s be practical,” or
“Let’s laugh at this.”
   The following passage becomes “wrong” when the writer creates a sudden
and jarring shift in tone. He begins with a tone that is urgent, cruel, and
efficient, but he switches to a tone that is poetic, leisurely, and analytical.
Readers, believing they knew the writer’s attitude toward the material, are
suddenly not so sure!

      Myron slammed the gate behind him and walked straight up to the cop
   on duty. “Now,” he said, “I want that scum now.” The cop moved quickly
   to block the door. But Myron was quicker. He rammed a fist into the cop’s
   gut, and when the cop keeled forward, Myron sliced a karate chop into the
   back of his neck. The cop dropped with a thud. Myron yanked open the
   door to the cellblock. He ran down the corridor to cell 9. He pulled open
   his jacket and grabbed the pistol from his holster. “Arrivederci, scum!” he
   cried at Demetrius. There was a pitiful shriek, the blast of gunfire, then the
   panicky screaming of other prisoners who feared a massacre.
      It was cool there in the cellblock, as cool as those distant mornings back
   in Trenton when Myron was a boy. The air here was light and refreshing,
   like a sparkling tonic brought in to douse the heat of the day. Even the
   cement walls around the cellblock had been painted a cool and soothing
   aqua, and on one end a mural of colorful birds enhanced the sense of
   calm. Myron was pleased with what he had done. For a moment he
   pretended that he was still sitting on the highest branch of that old
   cottonwood tree in Trenton, and he sipped slowly the heady air of success.




5. Begin at the Beginning

   Many writers work their way into a paper, letter, or story as if they were
feeling their way into a dark house. They use the first few pages, and
sometimes considerably more, as a kind of writing warm-up. There’s nothing
wrong with writing three pages of junk before you get to information that
matters, as long as those three pages are extinct before the final draft. In other
words, don’t include your warm-up exercises with the manuscript.
   Study the beginning of your story carefully. You might discover that with
the first 200 words you are “getting around to telling the story.” Look at the
first sentence. Is it substantive? Is it doing some work? Or is it merely
background information about what you haven’t quite begun yet?


                  Bad                                       Better

I’m writing this memo because Sam          Sam Moroni has fled the country, and I
Moroni has fled the country, and I need to need to replace him quickly.
replace him quickly.

  Obviously, no one is going to stop reading a memo because of five
unnecessary words, but many writers use three pages to say “I’m writing this
because . . .”
  Cross out every sentence until you come to one you cannot do without.
That is your beginning.
                              4
NINE WAYS TO SAVE TIME AND ENERGY


1. Use Pyramid Construction
2. Use Topic Sentences
3. Write Short Paragraphs
4. Use Transitional Phrases
5. Don’t Explain When You Don’t Have To
6. Use Bridge Words
7. Avoid Wordiness
8. Steal
9. Stop Writing When You Get to the End
1. Use Pyramid Construction


   Writing in the pyramid style means getting to the point at the top, putting
the “who, what, when, where, and why” in the first paragraph, and developing
the supporting information under it.
   Newspapers use pyramid style because they are in the business of getting
facts to readers as quickly as possible and because of the way news stories
must be edited for print. When a newspaper editor has a seven-inch story that
he or she has to put into a six-inch hole in the newspaper, that editor doesn’t
run through the story with a pencil looking for useless adverbs or sentences
that can be rewritten. He or she simply cuts an inch off the bottom. That is
why each inch of a pyramid-style story should be less important than the inch
that came before it.
   You should use pyramid style for any short report and for any story that
might be cut. And when you do, don’t put anything in paragraph 12 that the
reader must know in order to understand paragraph 7.


    Without Pyramid Construction                With Pyramid Construction

The flames could still be seen at dawn,   Mrs. Ethyl Murdock of Elgin, Illinois,
flickering lights at the bottom of the    pushed her new Dodge van off a cliff
canyon. Ethyl Murdock stood by,           yesterday afternoon after the truck broke
chuckling. “That’ll show them Detroit     down for the sixteenth time since she
folks,” she said.                         bought it just a week ago.
Ethyl Murdock had just pushed her        At dawn today the flames from the van
brand-new Dodge van off a cliff when she could still be seen flickering . . .
spoke those words . . .




2. Use Topic Sentences

   A topic sentence contains the thought that is developed throughout the rest
of the paragraph. The topic sentence is commonly the first sentence in a
paragraph.
   Deciding what to put in a paragraph and what to leave out will be easier if
you first write a topic sentence. For each paragraph ask, “What do I want to
say here? What point do I want to make? What question do I want to
present?” Answer with a single general sentence. That is your topic sentence.
Chances are that the topic sentence will fall neatly into the paragraph it
inspires. But even if you don’t include the topic sentence in your paragraph, it
will serve as a guide. When you rewrite your early drafts, ask how each
sentence in a paragraph supports the topic sentence of the paragraph. If the
answer is “It doesn’t,” then ask what other work the sentence is doing in the
paragraph. If the answer is “None,” get rid of the sentence.
   Here are two paragraphs from books. Each one is the beginning of a section
or a chapter. The first paragraph begins with a topic sentence. The second
paragraph ends with a topic sentence. But note that in each one all the
sentences support or “prove” the statement made in the topic sentence.

  Topic Sentence Begins Paragraph
Robin Phillips had a reputation as a theatrical wunderkind. There was very
little in the theatre to which he had not turned his hand at some time or
another, including acting, directing, and designing. He had a businessman’s
grasp of the financial side of theatre that was rare in an artist.
(from How Full of Briers: The Organizational Structure of the Non-Profit
Theatre Corporation)

  Topic Sentence Concludes Paragraph
The Gaming Board is in the business of protecting the goose, the industry
itself. The individual casinos have to guard the golden eggs, the money
generated by gambling. They do this through casino security and casino
surveillance, two separate but closely related operations.
(from High Stakes: Inside the New Las Vegas)




3. Write Short Paragraphs

  Your writing will be faster, livelier, and clearer if you write short
paragraphs. The reader will welcome the break and the white space. You will
be less likely to get tied up in verbal knots. Your thoughts will be better
organized and more succinctly expressed. You and the reader will find it
easier to locate specific statements.




4. Use Transitional Phrases

   A transition in writing is a word or group of words that moves the reader
from one place to another. The “place” might be the location of a scene, a spot
in time, or an area of discussion. The transition should be quick, smooth,
quiet, reliable, and logical. And it should bring to itself a minimum of
attention.
   Transitions are important because they represent passage through a “danger
zone” where you risk losing your reader. You use a transition to show the
reader the connection between what he has just read and what he is about to
read by implying the relationship between those two bodies of information.
Here are some common transitional phrases:


           Transitions of Time                    Transitions of Place

The following week . . .               On the other side of the mountain . . .
In December of that year . . .         In Black Eagle, Montana . . .
By the time Renaldo arrived . . .      Meanwhile, back at the ranch . . .
After the prom . . .                   When we got to Archie’s place . . .
Twenty years later . . .               From my house I could tell . . .

  Transitions of Subject
Consequently . . .
In this manner . . .
On the other hand . . .
In contrast to . . .
Despite all this . . .

  One other type of common transition occurs without words. It is the use of
spaces, such as skipping lines, starting new chapters, etc.
5. Don’t Explain When You Don’t Have To

   Writers often write long-winded and unnecessary transitions because they
are afraid that the short phrase hasn’t said enough. In the example below, you
can see how the writer slows down the story by trying to explain how Sam got
to the church when all he needs to do is acknowledge that Sam got from his
apartment to a church:

   Sam moved slowly down the stairs of the apartment building. He walked
   across the street and climbed into his car. He turned the ignition key and
   put the car in gear. Then he pulled out into Maple Street traffic. When he
   reached Wilder Avenue, he took a left and drove for three blocks. At
   Warren Street he waited for a red light that seemed to take forever. Finally
   he got onto Carver. He could see the Bethany Church up ahead.

  A better transitional sentence appears below:

   Sam drove to the church.

   Unless something important happened to Sam while driving his car over to
the church, don’t describe the drive. A transition is simply a bridge and should
be used to carry readers as quickly as possible from one place to the next.



6. Use Bridge Words

   A bridge word is a word that is used in one paragraph and then repeated in
the following transition. It shows you how the writer got from one thought to
another, thus supplying you with a smooth bridge between thoughts.
   We use bridge words all the time to make conversations smooth. If your
friend says, “Let’s pick apples Saturday. My brother Larry lives in
California,” you will feel slightly jarred. You are distracted and will want to
ask, “Why are you suddenly talking about your brother?” On the other hand,
if your friend says, “Let’s pick apples Saturday. My brother Larry and I used
to pick apples all the time. He lives in California,” the word apples provides
you with a bridge across your friend’s thoughts, and you go along easily.
   Similarly, in your writing you can convince the reader of a logical
connection between subjects by using good bridge words.
   In High Stakes, I used the bridge word business to make a logical transition
into Bill Bennett’s change in status to a serious businessman in Las Vegas.

      In 1965 Del Webb hired Bennett as a casino host at the Sahara in scenic
   Lake Tahoe, on the California-Nevada border, for $750 a month. There
   Bennett’s job was to squire high rollers around town and make sure their
   wheels were oiled. Flights had to be met; credit had to be arranged;
   restaurant tables had to be reserved. High rollers are a precious and
   delicate commodity in the gaming business, and Webb probably slept more
   easily at night knowing that they had been put into the hands of a man he
   knew and trusted.
      This was a job that required diplomacy, discretion, and great efficiency.
   But it was not a job that required Bill Bennett’s business sense. Still, it was
   a beginning, and from the beginning Bennett was convinced that he had
   stumbled onto a way to make more money than he had ever made in his
   life.



7. Avoid Wordiness

   Wordiness has two meanings for the writer. You are wordy when you are
redundant, such as when you write, “Last May during the spring,” or “little
kittens,” or “very unique.”
   Wordiness for the writer also means using long words when there are good
short ones available, using uncommon words when familiar ones are handy,
or using words that look like the work of a Scrabble champion, not a writer.
   The following example of wordiness, which I’ve taken from a letter that
appeared in Dr. Adele M. Scheele’s “At Work” newspaper column, shows
how dull a writer becomes when he or she tries to impress a reader with
“intellectual” language.

     In preparing a list of professional people whose opinion I respect, you
   are one of the first that comes to mind.
     It is my objective to more fully utilize my management expertise than has
   heretofore been the case. . . .
   The letter contains many of the writing mistakes we will discuss in this
book, but its greatest fault is wordiness.
   The overall tone of the letter is apologetic, meek, uncertain. The writer is
babbling. She’s trying to find words that are safe because they are vague and
they sound very professional to her. By trying to impress the reader with her
vocabulary, she is composing a letter that is almost incomprehensible.
   Instead of discussing herself, she discusses her “objective,” which is “to
more fully utilize” her “management expertise.” She would have made herself
clearer with simple words like goal, use, and skills. Instead of writing about
her job, she writes about being confined “to the area of small business and
self-employment in the apartment management field,” which doesn’t tell the
reader what she’s been doing for a living, only what area she’s been doing it
in.
   Here is a version of that letter that is clear, direct, and simple. It would get
a warm reception in any office because the reader doesn’t have to struggle to
understand it.

       I’ve made a list of professional people whose opinion I respect, and your
   name is at the top of the list.
       I want to use my management skills more fully. But since I’ve been
   running a small apartment management agency for the last six years, I’m a
   little bit out of touch with the job market. I’d like your guidance and advice
   so that I can evaluate the market for my skills. . . .




8. Steal

   Be a literary pack rat. Brighten up your story with a metaphor you read in
the Sunday paper. Make a point with an anecdote you heard at the barbershop.
Let a character tell a joke you heard in a bar. But steal small, not big, and
don’t steal from just one source. Someone once said that if you steal from one
writer, it’s called plagiarism, but if you steal from several, it’s called research.
So steal from everybody, but steal only a sentence or a phrase at a time. If you
use much more than that, you must get permission and then give credit. Here
are two examples of acceptable, honorable ways to steal.
   Whenever people ask me what I did for a living before I became a writer, I
reply, “I did all those crummy jobs that would someday look so glamorous on
the back of a book jacket.” It’s a cute line, one of many I use often in order to
keep myself constantly surrounded by an aura of cleverness. But I didn’t
invent the line. I read it twenty years ago in a TV Guide article by Merle
Miller, and I’ve used it ever since, rarely giving Miller credit for the line.
   The previous paragraph shows two examples of acceptable literary theft.
The first is Miller’s line, which the paragraph is about. The other is the
paragraph itself. It’s the opening paragraph for an article I wrote in Writer’s
Digest (April 1983) called “Do Editors Steal?” I stole it from myself.
   Thanks to the Internet, it is very difficult to get away with stealing any
significant amount of material or phrases. There are now plagiarism checkers
available for free online, and people use them.




9. Stop Writing When You Get to the End

   A novel ends when your protagonist has solved his or her problem.
   An opinion piece ends when your opinion has been expressed.
   An instructional memo ends when the reader has been instructed.
   When you have done what you came to do, stop. Do not linger at the door
saying good-bye sixteen times.
   How do you know when you have finished? Look at the last sentence and
ask yourself, “What does the reader lose if I cross it out?” If the answer is
“nothing” or “I don’t know,” then cross it out. Do the same thing with the
next-to-last sentence, and so forth. When you get to the sentence that you
must have, read it out loud. Is it a good closing sentence? Does it sound final?
Is it pleasant to the ear? Does it leave the reader in the mood you intended? If
so, you are done. If not, rewrite it so that it does. Then stop writing.
                                5
        TEN WAYS TO DEVELOP STYLE


1. Think About Style
2. Listen to What You Write
3. Mimic Spoken Language
4. Vary Sentence Length
5. Vary Sentence Construction
6. Write Complete Sentences
7. Show, Don’t Tell
8. Keep Related Words Together
9. Use Parallel Construction
10. Don’t Force a Personal Style
1. Think About Style


   In any discussion of writing, the word style means the way in which an idea
is expressed, not the idea itself. Style is form, not content. A reader usually
picks up a story because of content but too often puts it down because of
style.
   There is no subject that cannot be made fascinating by a well-informed and
competent writer. And there is no subject that cannot be quickly turned into a
literary sleeping pill by an incompetent writer.
   You probably would not buy Ray Bradbury’s book Dandelion Wine if while
browsing in the bookstore you turned to the version on the left (A). Contrast it
with the version on the right (B), Bradbury’s actual opening paragraph. You
will see that while both paragraphs contain the same information, the version
on the right has style, and that makes all the difference.


                    A                                          B

There wasn’t any noise at six a.m., and    It was a quiet morning, the town covered
nobody was up yet. The wind was about over with darkness and at ease in bed.
the way you’d want it, and everything was Summer gathered in the weather, the wind
pretty much okay. If you got up and took a had the proper touch, the breathing of the
look out the window, you could tell that   world was long and warm and slow. You
summer was beginning.                      had only to rise, lean from your window,
                                           and know that this indeed was the first
                                           real time of freedom and living, this was
                                           the first morning of summer.




2. Listen to What You Write

  Writing is not a visual art any more than composing music is a visual art.
  To write is to create music. The words you write make sounds, and when
those sounds are in harmony, the writing will work.
    So think of your writing as music. Your story might sound like the
Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2, or it might sound like “Satisfaction.” You decide.
But give it unity. It should not sound like a musical battle between the
Cleveland Symphony Orchestra and the Rolling Stones.
    Read aloud what you write and listen to its music. Listen for dissonance.
Listen for the beat. Listen for gaps where the music leaps from sound to
sound instead of flowing as it should. Listen for sour notes. Is this word a
little sharp, is that one a bit flat? Listen for instruments that don’t blend well.
Is there an electric guitar shrieking amid the whispers of flutes and violins?
Imagine the sound of each word as an object falling onto the eardrum. Does it
make a soft landing like the word ripple, or does it land hard and dig in like
inexorable? Does it cut off all sound for an instant, like brutal, or does it
massage the reader’s ear, like melodious?
    There are no good sounds or bad sounds, just as there are no good notes or
bad notes in music. It is the way in which you combine them that can make
the writing succeed or fail. It’s the music that matters.




3. Mimic Spoken Language

   Writing should be conversational. That does not mean that your writing
should be an exact duplicate of speech; it should not. Your writing should
convey to the reader a sense of conversation. It should furnish the immediacy
and the warmth of a personal conversation.
   Most real conversations, if committed to paper, would dull the senses.
Conversations stumble; they stray; they repeat; they are bloated with, you
know, like, meaningless words; and they are often cut short by intrusions. But
what they have going for them is human contact, the sound of a human voice.
   And if you can put that quality into your writing, you will get the reader’s
attention.
   So mimic spoken language in the variety of its music, in the simplicity of
its words, in the directness of its expression. But do not forfeit the enormous
advantages of the written word. Writing provides time for contemplation. Use
it well.
   In conversation the perfect word is not always there. In writing we can try
out fifteen different words before we are satisfied.
   In conversation we spread our thoughts thin. In writing we can compress.
  So strive to make your writing sound like a conversation, but don’t make it
an ordinary conversation. Make it a good one.




4. Vary Sentence Length

   This sentence has five words. Here are five more words. Five-word
sentences are fine. But several together become monotonous. Listen to what is
happening. The writing is getting boring. The sound of it drones. It’s like a
stuck record. The ear demands some variety. Now listen. I vary the sentence
length, and I create music. Music. The writing sings. It has a pleasant rhythm,
a lilt, a harmony. I use short sentences. And I use sentences of medium length.
And sometimes when I am certain the reader is rested, I will engage him with
a sentence of considerable length, a sentence that burns with energy and
builds with all the impetus of a crescendo, the roll of the drums, the crash of
the cymbals—sounds that say, “Listen to this; it is important.”
   So write with a combination of short, medium, and long sentences. Create a
sound that pleases the reader’s ear. Don’t just write words. Write music.




5. Vary Sentence Construction

   Most sentences have a subject, a predicate, and an object, and early in life
we were taught to present them in that order. The dog ate the bone. Dick and
Jane jumped into the river. A man walked down the street. Et cetera.
   But identical sentence constructions bore readers. Certainly you should
strive for clarity and not arrange your sentences in a way that strangles their
logic. But you should also keep the primary elements of the sentence dancing
so that they will create their own music.
   Below are two paragraphs in which all the sentences are constructed the
same way. They all begin with the subject, move on to the predicate, and end
with an object if there is one. What conclusion about the writer do you draw
after reading them?

     The Welcome Wagon Lady twinkled her eyes and teeth at Joanna. She
   was sixty if she was a day. She had ginger hair, red lips, and a sunshine-
   yellow dress. She said, “You’re really going to like it here! It’s a nice town
   with nice people! You couldn’t have made a better choice!” Her brown
   leather shoulder bag was enormous. It was old and scuffed. She dealt
   Joanna packets of powdered breakfast drink from it. There was soup mix.
   There was a toy-size box of non-pollutant detergent. There was a booklet of
   discount slips that were good at twenty-two local shops. There were two
   cakes of soap. There was a folder of deodorant pads.
      Joanna stood in the doorway. Both hands were full. She said, “Enough,
   enough. Hold. Halt. Thank you.”

   The sentences are all simple constructions—grade school concoctions. One
of the marks of an inexperienced writer is his or her inability to move beyond
these basic sentence constructions. If Ira Levin’s best-selling novel had
opened with those sentences, odds are good it would have been a worst-
selling novel. But it didn’t. The actual opening of Ira Levin’s Stepford Wives
follows. As you read it, take note of the variety of sentence constructions.

      The Welcome Wagon Lady, sixty if she was a day but working at youth
   and vivacity (ginger hair, red lips, a sunshine-yellow dress), twinkled her
   eyes and teeth at Joanna and said, “You’re really going to like it here! It’s
   a nice town with nice people! You couldn’t have made a better choice!”
   Her brown leather shoulder bag was enormous, old and scuffed; from it
   she dealt Joanna packets of powdered breakfast drink and soup mix, a toy-
   size box of non-pollutant detergent, a booklet of discount slips good at
   twenty-two local shops, two cakes of soap, a folder of deodorant pads—
      “Enough, enough,” Joanna said, standing in the doorway with both
   hands full. “Hold. Halt. Thank you.”



6. Write Complete Sentences

  Usually, only a complete sentence expresses a complete thought. A
complete sentence has a subject and a predicate. “The cat jumped off the
roof” is a complete sentence. “The cat jumped” is also a complete sentence.
“The cat,” however, is not a complete sentence. You should try to write
complete sentences.
  However, if your high school English teachers told you that all incomplete
sentences were unacceptable, they were wrong. Good writing often contains
incomplete sentences. The incomplete sentence is a useful tool. Used wisely,
it can invigorate the music of your words. Like a chime. Or the beat of a
drum.
   Here are two examples. The first is from my story “The Eight Thou.” The
second is from Ping by Gail Levine-Freidus.

      “Be damned if I know,” Charlie said. He got the cop laughing, then he
   patted him on the elbow and said, “Hey, look, you got a couple of
   cigarettes? I could be in this place for a long time. Years maybe.”
      This is the way Charlie liked to work them. Shoot the breeze. Crack
   jokes. Butter them up. Be cute. Then hit them for what you really want. He
   had charmed his way down from Burlington, Vermont, this way, thumbing
   and lying like a carnival barker all the way into Boston. His real dream
   was the West Coast. California. But he’d figured a big city like Boston
   would be the place to stop first and somehow hustle up a couple of
   hundred bucks for the cross-country trip. Unfortunately, the Boston P.D.
   hadn’t been quite as enchanted by his spiel as some of the people who had
   given him rides. He hadn’t been in town long. Ten days. And this was his
   third arrest.

   When I first arrived, I saw nothing. In time I discovered light. White light.
   And weightlessness. Then there was motion. For a while I felt as though I
   were flying. Soaring. Later, I sensed a stillness which held me nearly
   breathless. Yet, I was unafraid.

   Note that the partial sentences are used sparingly. Incomplete sentences do
not fare well in large numbers or in groups. They draw their musical strength
and often their meaning from the complete sentences that surround them.
   So write complete sentences ninety-nine percent of the time. But now and
then, if a partial sentence sounds right to you, that’s what you should write.
Period.




7. Show, Don’t Tell

  Throughout this book I will remind you that shorter is almost always better.
This is an exception. It usually takes more words to show than to tell, but you
can afford a few extra words for a tool this valuable.
   When you show people something, you are trusting them to make up their
minds for themselves. Readers like to be trusted. Don’t dictate to them what
they are supposed to see, or think, or feel. Let them see the person, situation,
or thing you are describing, and they will not only like what you have written,
they will like you for trusting them.
   Look at the following letters from camp. Letter A tells; letter B shows.
Which letter do you find more revealing: Which letter writer would you rather
know—Irma, or Donna?

                Letter A                                    Letter B

  Dear Jan,                                    Dear Jan,
  My new boyfriend, Arnold, is a terrific      My new boyfriend, Arnold, ran five
athlete. He is also incredibly smart, very miles to my cabin in the middle of that
sentimental, and sort of strange.           lightning storm last week. When he got
                          Yours truly, Irma here, he stood out in the rain and started
                                            shouting how he loves me in five different
                                            languages.
                                                                    Yours truly, Donna
  Show, don’t tell. Even in business letters and memos.
  You want Barbara Resnikoff to get a promotion, but you need the board’s
approval. Which memo would Barbara Resnikoff prefer to have you send?


                Memo A                                      Memo B

Ms. Resnikoff has been loyal,            Ms. Resnikoff turned down two offers
hardworking, and helpful to the company. from Westinghouse last year. She worked
I think she deserves a promotion.        fourteen-hour weekends, and she saved
                                         the Renaldo account even after it was
                                         discovered that the rabbit warehouse was
                                         empty. She deserves a promotion.




8. Keep Related Words Together

  Words that are part of the same information package are related, and they
should be clustered together to avoid confusion. Adjectives should be placed
near the nouns they describe so they don’t appear to be describing some other
noun. Likewise, adverbs should be close to the verbs they modify, and
dependent clauses should be near the words on which they depend for
meaning.


                   Bad                                       Better

The boy rode his horse through the winter The strong, proud boy rode his horse
woods, strong and proud as could be.      through the winter woods.
Garonovitch saw a small cut on the dog     Garonovitch saw a small cut on the left
that was on his left front paw.            front paw of the dog.
Nushka’s Roumanian pistol misfired when When Nushka tried to catch the Chinese
she tried to catch the Chinese bandits, bandits, her Roumanian pistol misfired,
which doesn’t happen often.             which doesn’t happen often.




9. Use Parallel Construction

   Though several consecutive sentences constructed the same way can bore
the reader, there are times when you should deliberately arrange words and
sounds in similar fashion in order to show the reader the similarity of
information contained in the sentences. Just as the steady beat of a drum can
often enrich a melody, the repetition of a sound can often improve the music
of your writing. This is called parallel construction.
   Listen to the difference parallel construction makes in the following
examples.


              Not Parallel                                  Parallel

I drove to the construction site to see   I drove to the construction site to see what
what I could find out from the workers. I I could find out from the workers. I talked
talked to the foreman. The electricians   to the foreman and electricians. I talked
and I had a discussion. This was followed to the carpenters and plumbers. They all
by a talk with the carpenters. Also, the  said the same thing. The project would
plumbers told me what they thought. The have to be started over.
same view was held by everybody. The
project would have to be started over.
Fish gotta swim, and flying is something   Fish gotta swim, birds gotta fly.
that birds must do.
                                           I came. I saw. I conquered.
First I came. Then I saw. Conquering
came next.
When one has been seen by you, you’ve   When you’ve seen one, you’ve seen them
seen them all.                          all.




10. Don’t Force a Personal Style

   Style is not something you can put onto your writing like a new set of
clothes. Style is your writing. It is inexorably knotted to the content of your
words and the nature of you. So do not pour the clay of your thoughts into the
hard mold of some personal writing style that you are determined to have. Do
not create in your head some witty, erudite, unmistakably exciting persona
and try to capture him or her on paper. Also, do not try to write like Elizabeth
Gilbert, Hunter S. Thompson, Raymond Carver, or anybody else. If you fail
you will look foolish, and if you succeed you will succeed only in announcing
to the world that you are not very creative. Strive instead to write well and
without self-consciousness. Then your style will emerge. It might be as
specifically yours as your thumbprint, or it might be as common as sunshine.
But at least it will be you.
                              6
 TWELVE WAYS TO GIVE YOUR WORDS
             POWER


1. Use Short Words
2. Use Dense Words
3. Use Familiar Words
4. Use Active Verbs
5. Use Strong Verbs
6. Use Specific Nouns
7. Use the Active Voice . . . Most of the Time
8. Say Things in a Positive Way . . . Most of the Time
9. Be Specific
10. Use Statistics
11. Provide Facts
12. Put Emphatic Words at the End
1. Use Short Words


   Short words tend to be more powerful and less pretentious than longer
words. Rape is a powerful term; sexual assault isn’t. Stop is stronger than
discontinue.
   The fastest way to learn why you should use short words is to read
anything by Ernest Hemingway. Hemingway, the Nobel Prize winner who
lands on almost everybody’s list of great American writers, was a miser when
it came to syllables and words. This paragraph, which I picked at random
from his The Sun Also Rises, contains only two words with more than two
syllables.

  Finally, after a couple more false klaxons, the bus started, and Robert
  Cohn waved good-by to us, and all the Basques waved good-by to him. As
  soon as we started out on the road outside of town it was cool. It felt nice
  riding high up and close under the trees. The bus went quite fast and made
  a good breeze, and as we went out along the road with the dust powdering
  the trees and down the hill, we had a fine view, back through the trees, of
  the town rising up from the bluff above the river. The Basque lying against
  my knees pointed out the view with the neck of a wine-bottle, and winked at
  us. He nodded his head.




2. Use Dense Words

   A dense word is a word that crowds a lot of meaning into a small space.
The fewer words you use to express an idea, the more impact that idea will
have. When you revise, look for opportunities to cross out several words and
insert one. Once a month is monthly; something new is novel; people they
didn’t know are strangers; and something impossible to imagine is
inconceivable.
3. Use Familiar Words

   Do you know what a mandible is? Your dentist does. She uses that word
every day.
   So if you are writing a story just for your dentist, use mandible. But if you
are writing for everybody else, use the more familiar word, jaw.
   A word that your reader doesn’t recognize has no power. If it confuses the
reader and sends him or her scurrying for the dictionary, it has broken the
reader’s spell.
   Familiar words have power. By avoiding very long words, you avoid most
of the words that your reader doesn’t know. But you should also replace short
words if they are so rare that your reader might not know them.
   Even though delegate is longer than depute, it is better. Don’t write
sclerous if you can write hardened, and if you have written that something is
virescent, please go back and say that it is turning green.
   A couple of tips. A word is familiar if it came easily to you but is not part
of some specialized knowledge you have, such as a botanical term. A word is
unfamiliar if you never heard of it until you found it in the thesaurus or if you
haven’t read it at least three times in the past year.



4. Use Active Verbs

   Active verbs do something. Inactive verbs are something. You will gain
power over readers if you change verbs of being such as is, was, and will be
to verbs of motion and action.


                  Bad                                         Better

A grandfather clock was in one corner,      A grandfather clock towered in one
and three books were on top of it.          corner, and three books lay on top of it.
As Samson enters the police station, a      As Samson enters the police station, a
burly sergeant is behind the desk, and      burly sergeant stands behind the front
three rookies are around the corner         desk, and three rookies hang around the
talking shop, ignoring the murder suspect   water cooler talking shop, ignoring the
who is near the open window at the back     murder suspect who edges near the open
of the room.                                window at the back of the room.
5. Use Strong Verbs

   Verbs, words of action, are the primary source of energy in your sentences.
They are the executives; they should be in charge. All other parts of speech
are valuable assistants, but if your verbs are weak, all the modifiers in the
world won’t save your story from dullness.
   Generally speaking, verbs are weak when they are not specific, are not
active, or are unnecessarily dependent on adverbs for their meaning.
   If you choose strong verbs and choose them wisely, they will work harder
for you than any other part of speech. Strong verbs will reduce the number of
words in your sentences by eliminating many adverbs. And, more important,
strong verbs will pack your paragraphs with the energy, the excitement, and
the sense of motion that readers crave.
   Sharpen a verb’s meaning by being precise. Turn look into stare, gaze,
peer, peek, or gawk. Turn throw into toss, flip, or hurl.
   Inspect adverbs carefully and always be suspicious. What are those little
buggers up to? Are they trying to cover up for a lazy verb? Most adverbs are
just adjectives with ly tacked on the end, and the majority of them should be
shoveled into a truck and hauled off to the junkyard. Did your character really
walk nervously, or did he pace? Did his wife eat quickly, or did she wolf down
her supper?
   This next passage is from my novel The Pork Chop War. Version A is
loaded with the weak verbs I used in the first draft. Version B is what I
published. As you read the passage, pronounce the verbs a little louder than
the rest. That’s what I do with my students’ papers. The sound you will hear is
the sound of the engine that is running the story.


               Version A                                   Version B

I stood on the stairs and watched as he     I stood on the stairs and watched as he
got back a bit and forcefully pushed his    reared back and slammed his foot against
foot against the door. The door opened up the door. The door flew open with the
with a screechy metallic sound. Currie      screech of wrenching metal hinges. Currie
went inside. I went quickly down to the     rushed inside. I ran down to the doorway
doorway to see what would happen. The to see what would happen. The old lady
old lady was on the other side of her       was on the other side of her kitchen
kitchen dialing the phone and staring       dialing the phone and scowling at the air.
angrily into the air. She pointed the phone She aimed the phone receiver at Currie,
receiver at Currie, as if she could shoot   as if she could shoot him with it.
him with it.
6. Use Specific Nouns

   Good writing requires the use of strong nouns. A strong noun is one that is
precise and densely packed with information.
   Be on the lookout for adjectives that are doing work that could be done by
the noun. Adjectives do for nouns what adverbs do for verbs; that is, they
identify some distinctive feature. They tell you what color the noun is, how
it’s shaped, what size it came in, or how fast it moved. Adjectives do great
work when they are needed. But they are too often brought in when they are
not needed. The careless writer drags them in to provide information that
would be more interesting if it came directly from the noun. (Who would you
prefer to meet—George Clooney or a guy who knows George Clooney?)
   Before you write a noun that is modified by one or two adjectives, ask
yourself if there is a noun that can convey the same information. Instead of
writing about a black dog, maybe you want to write about a Doberman. Do
you want to write large house, or is mansion really to the point? And before
you put down cruel treatment, ask if you can make a greater impression on
the reader with savagery, barbarity, or brutality.
   Read these two sentences:

     A man just walked into the room.
     A priest just walked into the room.

  Were you a little more interested when I told you the man was a priest?
That’s because he became more specific, and you could see him better.
Whether I had told you that a senator, a trash collector, or a Lithuanian had
entered the room, you still would have found him more interesting than a
mere man.
  Specific nouns have power. In fact, I recently bought a book because of a
specific noun. The name of the book is The Last Good Kiss by James
Crumley, and I plunked down my money after reading Crumley’s opening
sentence. Read it yourself and see if the same specific noun that forced me to
part with my money grabs you.

   When I finally caught up with Abraham Trahearne, he was drinking beer
   with an alcoholic bulldog named Foreball Roberts in a ramshackle joint
   just outside of Sonoma, California, drinking the heart right out of a fine
   spring afternoon.
   What specific noun hooked me? Bulldog. If Trahearne had been drinking
with an alcoholic dog, I might not have bought the book. But the specificity
of bulldog brought into focus not only the dog but also the bar, the beer, and
the fine spring afternoon. Why? Because by telling me what kind of dog it
was that drank with Trahearne, the narrator convinced me that he had actually
seen the dog. I believed the author’s words.
   When you take out a general word and put in a specific one, you usually
improve your writing. But when you use a specific word, readers assume you
are trying to tell them something, so make sure you choose the specific word
that delivers the message you want delivered. If your character is driving a
car down the highway and you change it to a Jaguar, you increase interest,
but you also characterize the driver. You build connotations of money and
speed. So make sure you choose a car that is consistent with all the other
messages you are trying to send the reader.



7. Use the Active Voice . . . Most of the Time

   When a verb is in the active voice, the subject of the sentence is also the
doer of the action.
   The sentence “John picked up the bag” is in the active voice because the
subject, John, is also the thing or person doing the action of “picking up.”
   The sentence “The bag was picked up by John” is in the passive voice
because the subject of the sentence, bag, is the passive receiver of the action.
   Generally the active voice makes for more interesting reading, and it is the
active voice that you should cultivate as your normal writing habit. The active
voice strikes more directly at the thought you want to express, it is generally
shorter, and it holds the reader closer to what you write because it creates a
stronger sense that “something is happening.”
   Listen to how the following passive voice sentences are improved when
they are turned into the active voice.


                Passive                                    Active

Dutch drawings and prints are what this   This book is about Dutch drawings and
book is about.                            prints.
The lightbulb was screwed in crookedly    The electrical engineer screwed in the
by the electrical engineer.               lightbulb crookedly.
An even break should never be given to a Never give a sucker an even break.
sucker.

   Try to use the active voice. But realize that there are times when you will
need to use the passive. If the object of the action is the important thing, then
you will want to emphasize it by mentioning it first. When that’s the case, you
will use the passive voice.
   Let’s say, for example, that you want to tell the reader about some strange
things that happened to your car. In the active voice it would look like this:

   Three strong women turned my car upside down on Tuesday. Vandals
   painted my car yellow and turquoise on Wednesday. The National
   Aeronautics and Space Administration launched my car into orbit around
   the moon on Thursday.

   The example shown above is not wrong, but it sounds choppy. To give the
story a flow, you would want to use the passive voice, keeping the emphasis
on your car:

   On Tuesday my car was turned upside down by three strong women. On
   Wednesday my car was painted yellow and turquoise by vandals. On
   Thursday my car was launched into orbit around the moon by the National
   Aeronautics and Space Administration.

  In the passive voice, the car is given emphasis, and the story about what
happened to it has a flow and rhythm lacking in the first example.



8. Say Things in a Positive Way . . . Most of the Time

   Usually what matters is what did happen, what does exist, and who is
involved. So develop the habit of stating information in a positive manner.
   If you want your reader to experience the silence of a church at night, write
“The church was silent.” If you write “There was no noise in the church,” the
first thing your reader will hear is the noise that isn’t there.
   Look at the sentences below and see how much more effective each one is
when written in a positive manner.
                Negative                                     Positive

Renaldo’s plan to breed giant rabbits did   Renaldo’s plan to breed giant rabbits
not succeed.                                failed.
The safe was not closed.                    The safe was open.
George and Martha were not sober when George and Martha were drunk when they
they got home.                        got home.
This insurance will not cost employees      This insurance is free to employees.
any money.

   Of course, there are times when the negative statement should be used. If
it’s ten o’clock on a stormy night and your wife was due home at six, you
won’t call your brother and state the positive: “Jennifer is out.” You’ll
emphasize the negative: “Jennifer is not home yet.”
   In the sentences below, the negative sentence is stronger than the positive.


                 Positive                                   Negative

The President was someplace else during The President did not show up for the
the inauguration.                       inauguration.
Russian athletes were in Russia during      Russian athletes did not come to the Los
the Los Angeles Olympics.                   Angeles Olympics.




9. Be Specific

   A specific word or phrase is usually better than a general one. The specific
word etches a sharper picture and helps your reader to see what you are
describing.
   Picture a box.
   Now picture a black box.
   Now picture a black box with shiny silver hinges.
   You can see the box more clearly as it becomes more specific.
   Of course, there must be a limit to this. I could tell you about a small black
box with shiny silver hinges on one end and an inlaid marble top which has a
crimson heart painted on it with the most darling cupids dancing around the
heart, and so forth. You would see the box, but you would be bored by it and
by me.
   Try to be specific without being wordy. Don’t make a sentence specific by
hooking up a freight train of details to it. Make it specific by whittling all the
possible word combinations down to those few that say what you want them
to say.


                 General                                   Specific

She wore two pieces of clothing.           She wore a bra and panties.
Recently there was a death in my family.   On March 5 my father died.
Various ethnic groups have settled in      Greeks, Italians, and Puerto Ricans have
Worcester.                                 settled in Worcester.
Some time ago a public official in         Three years ago a Montana senator killed
Montana committed a serious crime.         a man.
My son is having difficulty with two       My son Adam is flunking math and
subjects.                                  science.
LeBron James scored well and pulled        LeBron James scored 35 points and
down several rebounds.                     pulled down 18 rebounds.




10. Use Statistics

   A few well-placed statistics will establish your credibility. If they are
accurate and comprehensible, they will show the reader that you have done
your homework and know what you are talking about. Keep in mind,
however, that too many statistics will numb your reader’s ability to draw
meaning from them. Statistics should be sprinkled like pepper, not smeared
like butter.
   In the following paragraphs from The Greatest Horse of All Time, author
Steve Haskin uses statistics effectively. He establishes credibility. But also, by
providing the reader with the number of starts, number of
wins/seconds/thirds, and track conditions, he gives the reader the necessary
context in which to view other information in his post.

     From a statistics standpoint, you can start with their combined record of
   28 starts, 22 wins, two seconds, and a third, and if you believe that
   Arrogate was suffering from a physical problem, perhaps back related, in
   his last three starts, and are willing to ignore those races, then you can
   make that 22 wins in 25 starts.
      You can add the fact that of their 22 wins, 16 were in grade 1 stakes,
   accomplished at 11 different racetracks at distances from seven furlongs to
   11⁄2 miles on fast, sloppy, and muddy tracks. Also, of their 22 wins, 13
   were on the lead, three were coming from second, four coming from third,
   one coming from fifth, and one coming from ninth. So they were far from
   one-dimensional, and could adapt to any scenario. And their average
   margin of victory in those 22 wins was over 41⁄2 lengths.



11. Provide Facts

   In the following paragraph, the writer has drawn the right conclusions. His
statements are factual. But because he is telling the reader his conclusions
instead of providing the facts from which the reader can draw his or her own
conclusions, the writing will not have impact.

   A lot of people go to Las Vegas. In fact, some people like it so much they
   go back again and again. A lot of them fly in from a lot of different places,
   and start gambling right off the plane. They spend a lot of money in Las
   Vegas, at the casinos, and on their housing and transportation.

   The above information lacks the facts needed to prove the author’s point.
Look below at a paragraph I wrote on the same subject in High Stakes: Inside
the New Las Vegas to see how much more persuasive an author can be with
facts.

   Las Vegas is a city that in 1990 drew 20.3 million visitors. According to
   polls conducted by the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority, 75
   percent of them were repeat visitors, and 35 percent were Californians.
   Forty-two percent flew into McCarren International Airport, eighteenth
   busiest in the nation, on one of the 575 daily flights, where they were
   immediately greeted by slot machines rumored to be the stingiest in
   town. . . . They stayed, for the most part, in the city’s 63 major hotels and
   214 motels. They spent about $13 billion on hotels, meals, transportation,
   and entertainment, and left behind almost $4 billion in gaming losses,
   more than half of it in the city’s 85,000 slot machines.
12. Put Emphatic Words at the End

   Emphatic words are those words you want the reader to pay special
attention to. They contain the information you are most eager to
communicate. You can get that extra attention for those words by placing
them at the end of the sentence.
   If you want to emphasize the fact that redwood trees are tall, you might
write, “Some redwoods are more than 350 feet tall.” But if you want to
emphasize the fact that one of the attractions in California is the redwood
trees, you would write, “Also found in California are the 350-foot redwood
trees.”
   If you want to emphasize the amount of money that somebody owes you,
you write, “By June first please send me a check for $107.12.” If you want to
emphasize the due date, you write, “Please send me a check for $107.12 by
June first.” And if you want to emphasize who the check is to go to, write,
“On June first the check for $107.12 should be sent to me.”
   This is a lesson best learned by ear. Listen to how the impact of a sentence
moves to whatever information happens to be at the end.

     I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
     I come not to praise Caesar, but to bury him.

     Ask what you can do for America, not what America can do for you.
     Ask not what America can do for you; ask what you can do for America.
                                7
  ELEVEN WAYS TO MAKE PEOPLE LIKE
         WHAT YOU WRITE


1. Make Yourself Likable
2. Write About People
3. Show Your Opinion
4. Obey Your Own Rules
5. Use Anecdotes
6. Use Examples
7. Name Your Sources
8. Provide Useful Information
9. Use Quotations
10. Use Quotes
11. Create a Strong Title
1. Make Yourself Likable


   In order to write successfully, you don’t have to become a great writer. But
you do have to make yourself likable. If you are asking people to buy your
product, take your advice, mail a check, or worry about the problem you
present, you first want them to care about you. When you write well, you
share a private moment with the readers. Present yourself to readers as
someone they would welcome into their homes. Write clearly and
conversationally, and strive always to present in your writing some honest
picture of who you are.
   Readers will like you if you edit from your work French phrases, obscure
literary allusions, and archaic words that are known to only six persons in the
world.
   Readers will like you if you seem to understand who they are and what
their world is like. If you write an article called “Getting Back on the Budget”
for Woman’s Day, and you begin by advising the readers to go out and borrow
$100,000, you will reveal your ignorance of the readers’ financial status. The
readers won’t like you. (And of course the editors at Woman’s Day won’t like
you and won’t publish your article.)
   Readers will like you if you use humor in almost everything you write. Of
course, there are times when humor is inappropriate (on a death certificate,
for example), but don’t hesitate to bring humor into your business
correspondence and articles.
   Readers will like you if you show that you are human. In a how-to piece,
for example, you might write, “This third step is a little hard to master. I
ruined six good slides before I got it right. So be smarter than I was; practice
on blanks.”




2. Write About People

  People are why TVs get turned on. People are why books get opened.
People are why magazines are purchased. And people are why the well-told
tale has been listened to for centuries.
   People is the one subject that everybody cares about.
   What do other people think? How do they act? What makes them angry,
happy, enthusiastic? How will they vote in the next election? How can I get
them to fall in love with me, buy my product, support my plan? These are the
questions readers ask.
   So try to put humanity into everything you write. There are times when you
cannot comfortably dress your prose in flesh and blood, but those times are
rare. Even a how-to article is about a person named “you.”
   Don’t write about the new bookkeeping system. Write about how the new
bookkeeping system will affect people.
   If you are writing about the welfare crisis, begin with an anecdote about
one family that lives in a car because they cannot pay rent out of their small
welfare check.
   If you are writing a blog to attract new members to your church, don’t write
about the steeple and the organ. Write about the people who come to church
suppers, the people who volunteer for committees, the people your readers
will meet if they show up for church on Sunday.



3. Show Your Opinion

   Few things are duller than a man or woman without an opinion. Your
opinion is not always appropriate, but often it is the thing that gives writing its
life and color. In fact, it is frequently dishonest to hide your opinion because it
will find its way into your writing anyhow by influencing your choice of what
material to include and what to ignore.
   I often color my stories with my opinion. I think it makes for more
interesting writing. But I try to be fair, also. If I put my opinion into the story,
I also include opinions of people who don’t agree with me.
   Below is the lead for an article I wrote about hitchhiking for the Telegram
& Gazette (Worcester, MA). There’s nothing secret about my view of the
subject: it’s all over the piece. But in that article I also included the views of
policemen, parents, kids, and drivers.

      By any rational standard, the idea of hitchhiking—good Samaritanism
   in its purest form, people helping people, etc.—should be a good thing.
       And yet if you stop any ten people on the street and ask them about
   hitchhiking, you will hear the darkest sort of fumblings. You will hear that
   hitchhiking is a bad thing.
       Hitchhikers are muggers, you will hear, they are thieves and rapists. And
   if they are not, then they are fair and fragile prey for an army of savage
   cretins that haunts our highways. Either way, so the story goes, when
   hitchhiking takes place, someone is scheduled to end up in a shallow
   roadside grave bludgeoned into oblivion by some highway lunatic.
       With over 30,000 hitchhiking miles behind me, and perhaps another
   10,000 miles of driving hitchhikers, I was anything but objective about
   this. It rankled me to the core that society had become so concerned about
   hitchhiking, and I was convinced that hitchhiking, like apartment living
   and late night walks, had been sensationalized all out of whack by TV and
   movies. Every time a hitchhiker shows up on TV, you can bet somebody is
   finished.

   By including my opinion in the article, I gave the reader a basis for
discussion, either with other people or in his own mind. Even if the reader
says, “I totally disagree,” I have made him or her think about my subject. I
have accomplished my goal. I don’t care if the reader agrees with my opinion.
The important thing is that he or she respond to it. If you can stir your reader
up, then your writing has achieved some success.



4. Obey Your Own Rules

   When you begin to write, you also begin in subtle ways to set down a list of
rules, just as you set down the rules at the start of a game. Through your title
or first paragraph you communicate to the reader certain guidelines about the
subject, the scope, or the tone of the story.
   If your title is “Black Mayors in America,” you have set a rule that says,
“Everything in this story is related to black mayors in America,” and you will
be violating that rule if you write too heavily about mayors who were not
black, black people who were not mayors, or black mayors who were not in
America.
   If your story begins “Angelica put a spell on Mark three times, and
suddenly he found himself craving her body,” you have set a rule that says,
“Impossible things can happen here.” But if you are writing a contemporary
love story, and you bring in a witch in chapter nine, you are breaking the rule
that says, “This is a true-to-life story,” and you will lose your reader.
   If you begin your story “Many people, it seems, weave from their own
experience, hopes, fears, and deepest desires a fabric of conviction in UFOs
that is so strong it cannot be ripped apart,” you have made a rule that says,
“The tone of this story is serious and respectful of the subject.” If you begin
“It seems as if every nutcase from Tallahassee to Timbuktu has a scorched
circle in his backyard from a flying saucer landing—aliens must be
particularly drawn to the mentally ill,” you have made a rule that says, “This
is going to be a humorous look at the subject.” You must stick with the tone
you have established. Readers won’t object to any particular tone or rule.
They only ask that they be informed and that you don’t break the rules you
set.




5. Use Anecdotes

   An anecdote is a little story or incident that makes a point about your
subject. The word comes from the Greek anekdota, which means “things
unpublished,” and ideally your anecdote should be an unpublished incident
you discovered in your research. Anecdotes are great reader pleasers. They
are written like fiction, often contain dialogue, and reduce a large issue to a
comprehensible size by making it personal. Anecdotes crystallize a general
idea in a specific way.
   Writing a short, colorful anecdote is one of the most compelling ways to
begin an article, query letter, or business proposal, and a couple of well-
placed anecdotes in your longer stories will break the lock of formality and
win your reader’s affection as well as his or her attention.
   Here is an anecdote I used to begin a magazine article about psychics.

      When Mal Brown of Leominster was a kid, he fell out of an apple tree,
   got one leg knotted in a branch, tipped upside down, and was yanked to a
   stop.
      It was a mishap that Brown believes could have killed or seriously
   injured him, but it didn’t. And he believes it didn’t because the Tibetan
   monk was with him.
      “That was the first time I saw the Tibetan monk,” says Brown, now the
   35-year-old father of three daughters.
      Brown says the Tibetan monk, a vision that never speaks, has been with
   him all his life, helping him out in jams, appearing at moments of jeopardy,
   offering reassurance that danger will pass.




6. Use Examples

   This book is full of examples. I say that something is true, and then I show
you an instance of it being true. Because this is a teaching book, many of the
examples are long. But examples are usually short in writing. Often they are
tacked on to the end of a general statement. They do a lot of work, and they
impress readers. Examples are used to back up your statements. They clarify
your generalizations and help to prove that you are right. Finally, they show
the reader what, exactly, it is that you’re talking about.
   Below is an example from Weight Watchers that shows how I helped prove
a point I’d made about foot care.

      Most nonspecialists don’t know much about foot care and that can lead
   to trouble. For example, Jed Norin’s bone spur was originally
   misdiagnosed as a wart by a general practitioner.




7. Name Your Sources

   If your reader works in the downtown area of Austin, Texas, and you write
that an earthquake will devastate downtown Austin on February 19, your
reader is going to be extremely interested to know where you got your
information.
   If you mention that you learned of the upcoming earthquake from Ramona
Moon Dobbins, a Louisiana swamp witch who saw the whole thing in a
vision while she was shuffling her tarot deck, your reader might not be too
concerned. But if you mention that your information came from Dr. Winston
Ruxbacher, director of the United States Seismographic Study, your reader
might decide that February 19 would be a real good day to skip work and visit
an aunt in El Paso.
   Your reader’s reaction to your information depends on your sources.
   Sources are the people you talk to and the material you read while
researching your story. You could mention all your sources in your article or
paper, but if you do, you risk losing your reader’s attention. Lists of sources
can become very boring very quickly.
   Decide who or what your most valuable sources are, and name only them.
Good sources help build credibility and take on added importance when you
are contradicting widely held assumptions, or when a crucial decision
depends on your accuracy.
   You can note sources informally in the text, or you can include a note on
sources at the front or back of your story. Such a note appears below:

  Sources
  In-depth interviews with Alexander Millis, president, National
     Wenfronckmonkin Institute, and Randy Freidus, host of the nationally
     syndicated television show Your Wenfronckmonkin and You.
  Zen and the Art of Wenfronckmonkin by Jim Bellarosa
  Wenfronckmonkin in the New Age by Gloria Bunker
  “Wenfronckmonkin: A Male Perspective,” article in Macho magazine, June
    1983

   Again, don’t include every book you read and every expert you spoke to,
just the major sources of information.
   You should also include the source of opinions expressed in your story.
   If you’re expressing your own opinion, don’t couch it in the vague “There’s
a growing feeling” or “People say.” But neither do you have to precede every
sentence with “I think” or “It’s my opinion that.” If you write, “Sturge
Thibedeau is the worst director in Hollywood,” it’s clear that that’s your
opinion, since it is not a measurable fact.
   And what if it’s not just your opinion? Don’t make generalized statements
such as “Sturge Thibedeau is widely considered to be the worst director in
Hollywood”; back it up with evidence, such as “In a 2018 poll of one hundred
top directors and agents, ninety-seven rated Sturge Thibedeau as the worst
director in Hollywood.” If you can’t support the opinion with something, then
you have to wonder where you got the idea in the first place.
   I’m not trying to improve your ethics, only your writing. A phrase like
widely regarded means nothing to the reader unless he or she knows what you
mean by widely regarded. Does widely regarded mean the writer and his
brother? Does it mean three bad actors who got canned from Thibedeau’s
films? Does it mean Sturge Thibedeau’s ex-wives? Or does it mean one
hundred knowledgeable people in the film industry?




8. Provide Useful Information

   Useful information is information that has “service value.” That means
readers can do something after they read what you have written. They might
bake a cake because you gave them a recipe, or they might start getting in
shape because you gave them directions for ten exercises. Useful information
is often nothing more than a list of organizations, dates, addresses, or routes.
It’s not the kind of thing that marks the writer as the next Tom Wolfe, but it is
the kind of thing that will make your writing saleable.



9. Use Quotations

   Though “quotations” and “quotes” are the same thing, we generally think
of quotations as words that are notable enough to have been preserved
through time.
   Use quotations when you need to enhance an idea with something poetic or
reinforce a generalization or an opinion.
   Quotations will create the idea that you are not alone in your opinion, that
somebody, perhaps even Abraham Lincoln, agrees with you. They will give
you credibility by association.
   Don’t use a lot of quotations, however, or they will look more like crutches
to hold you than planks to support you.
   How do you come up with good quotations? The most famous source is
Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations, but there are a variety of paperback and
hardcover books of quotations. Some are arranged by topic, some by author,
some by both. Browse in the bookstore. Also, when you hear a quotation you
like, write it down. Here’s how you might use a quotation:

   “Hold fast to dreams for if dreams die, life is a broken winged bird that
   cannot fly.” The words were written by Langston Hughes, but they have
   special meaning today for Sturge Thibedeau. Thibedeau, who has been
  called one of Hollywood’s worst directors, achieved his lifelong dream
  yesterday with the release of Treadmill to Oblivion.




10. Use Quotes

   Quotes are the words someone said to you when you interviewed her for
your story, or short excerpts from some of the reading you did in your
research. Quotes in your story will attract readers. The white space
surrounding the quotes makes the typed or printed page less intimidating.
And, more important, quotes create credibility.
   In her book How Full of Briers: The Organizational Structure of the Non-
Profit Theatre Corporation, my student Carol Dougherty provided her readers
with a lot of nuts-and-bolts information on how a nonprofit theatre operates,
what works, what doesn’t, and how theatres are organized. Here are two
examples of how she made those facts stronger and more credible by
seasoning her book with quotes from various people.

  The composition of the Board is a matter of high priority to all parties
  involved in the theatre, as evidenced by this heartfelt plea by
  internationally renowned director John Neville: “Can there be an ideal
  board, small enough to be coherent, large enough to be representative;
  generous and wise enough to delegate comprehensively, but acute enough
  to rumble the phony; discreet enough not to interfere but quick enough to
  respond to the wishes of its community; average enough to represent the
  ordinary theatre-goer but special enough to have an insight into the world
  of professional theatre?”

  Associate artist Susan Fleetwood tried to explain some of the qualities that
  make the Royal Shakespeare Company exceptional: “There are certain
  groups of people who quite by chance will find themselves working
  together with a director on a play, and magic will work. . . . More often
  than not, magic does occur in the Royal Shakespeare Company, and when
  it does, it is wonderful.”

  Quotes must be used judiciously. You can’t just hang one up every time
you want to cover a hole in your story.
   Use a quote when the speaker’s words will achieve your goals more
effectively than your own words.


                  Bad                                       Better

There are strong indications that a       Bob Fredola, the nation’s leading
seedless watermelon will soon be entering watermelon expert, told me, “The
the market and that Midwest will be one seedless watermelon is a fact. I’ve seen it,
of the primary distributors.              I’ve tasted it, and I’m convinced that
                                          Midwest will be able to move three
                                          million of those suckers in the first year
                                          alone.”

   The people you interview often say things that are provocative,
informative, and entertaining. However, they rarely say those things in a
concise way. They ramble. They repeat. They reiterate.
   If you quote people word for word, most of your quotes will be tedious and
half of them will be incomprehensible. Unless national security is at stake,
trim your quotes down to the words you need. It is perfectly appropriate to cut
the fat from interviews and present to the reader only the meat of what the
speaker said. However, cut carefully. A carelessly cut quote can change the
meaning of the speaker’s words. You must remain true to the spirit of what
was said, if not the form.


                  Bad                                       Better

Governor Cashman leaned back in his        Governor Cashman leaned back in his
chair. “My first wife?” he said. “That     chair. “My first wife?” he said. “That was
was Evelyn, huh? Let me see . . . Let      Evelyn, and she was a shrew.”
me . . . No, wait a minute. Let me put it
this way. She was an interesting— Well, to
tell you the truth, she was a shrew.”




11. Create a Strong Title

  A good title will make people curious. Instead of “The Marketing of Italian
Cuisine,” try “How to Sell a Meatball to Your Mother.”
   A good title is a guide. Revealing something about your content separates
the appropriate readers for your story from those who would have no interest
in it. “A Football Rivalry” is too broad. Use “The Army-Navy Game: A
Gridiron Fight for the Honor of the Corps.”
   A good title is short. Don’t write, “Investigative Techniques and
Conclusions Concerning the Proposal to Extend Client Services.” Write,
“Results of the Client Survey.”
   A good title hints at the limits of information in the story; that is, it suggests
the slant. Don’t write, “How Sports Enriched My Religious Life.” Write, “A
Christian Looks at Baseball.”
   A good title should reveal information, not hide it. Don’t write, “Tips on an
Important Purchase.” Write, “Six Ways to Save Money Buying a House.”
                              8
  TEN WAYS TO AVOID GRAMMATICAL
              ERRORS


1. Respect the Rules of Grammar
2. Do Not Change Tenses
3. Know How to Use the Possessive Case
4. Make Verbs Agree with Their Subjects
5. Fix Dangling Modifiers
6. Avoid Shifts in Pronoun Forms
7. Do Not Split Infinitives
8. Beware These Common Mistakes
9. Be Sensitive to Changes in the Language
10. Prefer Good Writing to Good Grammar
1. Respect the Rules of Grammar


    To succeed as a writer, you must respect the rules of grammar. If editors or
teachers have consistently found grammatical errors in your writing, the flaw
in your work is not minor. It is fatal. Good writing and good grammar are not
twins, but they are usually found in the same place.
    The rules of grammar exist to help you write well, not to sabotage your
work, and you cannot write well without them. The rules of grammar organize
the language just as the rules of arithmetic organize the world of numbers.
Imagine how difficult math would be if three and three equaled six only once
in a while or if a tenth was equal to ten percent only when somebody felt like
it. Grammatical rules about tense, gender, number, person, and case provide
us with a literary currency that we can spend wherever English is spoken or
read. Grammar is a system of rules for speaking and writing a given language,
and that system was not created just so that English teachers would have
something to harass you about. It exists so that we can communicate well, and
when you blatantly violate portions of the system, you are chipping away at
the stability of the whole.
    While you should accept the fact that changes do occur in the language,
you should also resist each change every step of the way. Change should not
come easily. New words and constructions seeking entry into the language
should be met by a mighty army of grammarians saying, “It’s wrong,” and the
rest of us saying, “It just doesn’t sound right,” so that the trendy, the
senseless, and the merely pretty fall dead on the battlefield, and only the truly
valuable survive. Change, if I might switch my metaphor, should come
gradually and rarely, or the language will fall like a table that has all its legs
removed at once instead of replaced one at a time.




2. Do Not Change Tenses

  If you begin to write in one tense, you should not switch to another.
                    Bad                                         Better

We were going over to Tad’s house to see     We were going over to Tad’s house to see
his daughter, Riley. When we arrived,        his daughter, Riley. When we arrived,
Molly says, “The baby just fell asleep, so   Molly said, “The baby just fell asleep, so
you can’t see her.”                          you can’t see her.”
Each day, John rose from bed and             Each day, John rose from bed and
brushed his teeth. Today is different.       brushed his teeth. Today was different.
Today, John doesn’t rise from bed at all.    Today, John didn’t rise from bed at all.
The reason? He’s dead.                       The reason? He was dead.
You have been late for work; your work is You are late for work; your work is of
of poor quality; and you don’t seem to    poor quality; and you don’t seem to care
care about this company.                  about the company.




3. Know How to Use the Possessive Case

Most nouns are made possessive by adding ’s: The dog’s paws, a child’s toy,
the ocean’s beauty. However, if a noun ends in s already and is plural, simply
add an apostrophe: The dogs’ paws. A singular noun ending in s may be made
possessive either way: The actress’s role/The actress’ role.


                  Wrong                                         Right

My families dogs don’t eat table scraps.     My family’s dogs don’t eat table scraps.
The actresses’s clothes are over in the      The actresses’ clothes are over in the
corner.                                      corner. (More than one actress.)
All of the girl’s hats are on their heads.   All of the girls’ hats are on their heads.
Deloreses needs are obvious.                 Delores’ needs are obvious.
                                             Or:
                                             Delores’s needs are obvious.

   When joint possession is being shown, the ’s usually is added only to the
last member of the series: June and Jane’s mother is coming to lunch.
However, if what is possessed is not identical, each noun in the series should
have ’s: June’s and Jane’s teachers are coming to lunch.
   With compound nouns, the ’s is added to the final word:
     My mother-in-law’s house is spotless.
     The Queen of England’s dogs kept barking.

  The personal pronoun it does not use an apostrophe in its possessive form:


                  Wrong                                         Right

The dog scratched it’s collar.               The dog scratched its collar.
The perfume lost it’s scent.                 The perfume lost its scent.




4. Make Verbs Agree with Their Subjects

  Plural subjects require plural verbs; singular subjects require singular
verbs. When writing a long or complicated sentence, check to make certain
your verb agrees in number with its subject.


                  Wrong                                         Right

One of the nicest memories Linda has are One of the nicest memories Linda has is
those memories of her wedding.           the memory of her wedding.
                                             Or:
                                             The nicest memories Linda has are those
                                             of her wedding.
The list of actors who will be in the cast   The list of actors who will be in the cast is
are posted on the bulletin board.            posted on the bulletin board.
The dog, as well as its fleas, are in the    The dog, as well as its fleas, is in the car.
car.                                         (The number of the subject and verb is not
                                             affected by parenthetical phrases
                                             introduced by with, together with,
                                             including, as well as, no less than, plus,
                                             etc.)
Will everybody take their pencil out of      Will everybody take a pencil out of his or
their desks?                                 her desk? (The following nouns are
                                             singular: Each, every, everybody,
                                             someone, somebody, no one, anyone, and
                                             anybody.)
5. Fix Dangling Modifiers

   A dangling modifier is a word or group of words that appears to modify an
inappropriate word in the same sentence. The error occurs most often when
passive rather than active verbs are used.


                Dangling                                     Revised

In drawing the picture, his wife was used In drawing the picture, he used his wife as
as the model.                             the model. (His wife did not draw the
                                          picture.)
To find out who killed him, all the         To find out who killed him, I had to
criminals had to be questioned.             question all the criminals. (The criminals
                                            did not find out.)
Knowing this, and wanting a nice home, a Knowing this, and wanting a nice home,
new kitchen had to be installed.         the Smith family had to install a new
                                         kitchen. (The kitchen did not know, or
                                         want.)




6. Avoid Shifts in Pronoun Forms

   Be consistent in your use of a pronoun. Do not switch from singular forms
to plural ones.


               Inconsistent                                Consistent

After a student has written a paper, they   After a student has written a paper, she
should take a break.                        should take a break.




7. Do Not Split Infinitives

  An infinitive is split when an adverb is placed between the word to and a
verb.
                   Bad                                        Better

She wanted to quickly run the race.         She wanted to run the race quickly.
Dave wanted to really make it big as a      Dave really wanted to make it big as a
singer.                                     singer.
If we were to carefully examine the         If we were to examine the problem
problem, we could figure out a solution.    carefully, we could figure out a solution.

   There are times when you will need to split an infinitive in order to make
the meaning of your sentence clear. Do so, but do so only when the split is
necessary.


                   Bad                                        Better

To go grocery shopping frequently will      To frequently go grocery shopping will
result in increased spending.               result in increased spending.
Atticus Finch wanted to serve justice best. Atticus Finch wanted to best serve justice.




8. Beware These Common Mistakes

   In addition to major grammatical mistakes, there are a good many minor
mistakes to be made, and nobody’s hands are completely clean. We all have a
few grammatical rules that we can never quite nail down despite our “ears”
for language. Many people cannot remember the difference between who and
whom. (Who is typically the subject of a sentence and whom is an object that
follows a preposition such as to, with, for, or about. “Who is going to the
prom with you, and with whom did she go last year?”) Many writers use like
as a conjunction (She walks like she’s got a train to catch), even though most
grammarians insist it be used only as a preposition (It looks like a luxury car,
and it rides like a dream). And almost everybody gets confused about lay and
lie. (And with good reason. Lay means to put something down, and lie means
to recline, but the past tense of lie is, would you believe, lay.)
   Another tricky distinction to remember is between was and were. Use was
when you’re talking about a fact or possible fact: “If he was afraid, I couldn’t
tell” (I don’t know if he was afraid or not) and were when there is no
possibility of fact (Beyoncé sings “If I Were a Boy” because she is not a boy).
   The difference between that and which is another frequent source of
confusion. That is used to introduce a restrictive clause. A restrictive clause
“restricts” the meaning of your noun and can’t be removed from the sentence
without subtracting some of its sense. “I love the book that Alex gave me”
restricts us to, or identifies, the specific book: the one Alex gave me. A
nonrestrictive clause is a piece of extra information introduced by which. For
example, “I love the book, which Alex gave me” assumes you know which
book we’re talking about but adds the detail that it came from Alex. You’ll
usually see a comma prior to a nonrestrictive clause.
   This distinction is a good general rule of thumb, but it’s so common to see
which used with a restrictive clause (“Students protested the rule which
prohibits gum chewing”) that you’ll never get dinged for it.
   Minor mistakes like these might confuse, disturb, or disgust your reader,
depending on which mistakes you make, how often you make them, and who
the reader is. It’s arbitrary. When I wear an editor’s hat, I don’t mind a writer
using who instead of whom, or occasionally using like as a conjunction. On
the other hand, I would be inclined to reject the writer who consistently used
like as a conjunction (even though Shakespeare did it) or who wrote, “I lied
down for a nap.”
   When it comes to minor grammatical mistakes, readers don’t all draw lines
at the same place. But all readers have a limited number of grammatical
mistakes that they will forgive, so you should at least aim for grammatical
perfection except when you can improve the writing by breaking a rule of
grammar.
   Many grammatical errors occur because the writer tries too hard not to
make a mistake. Instead of trusting his or her ear for language, the writer
reacts to some traumatic correction in childhood. Most of us, for example,
once said, “Jimmy and me are going to the movies,” and had some impolite
adult snap at us, “It’s ‘Jimmy and I are going to the movies.’” Many people
were corrected so often that they now change all their me’s to I’s and write
things like “The contract was given to Jimmy and I.” (It should be “Jimmy
and me.” I is nominative, me is objective.) Or, having been bawled out for
saying, “I played bad,” when he should have said, “I played badly,” the kid
turns into an adult who writes things like “I feel badly about your loss,” when
he means that he feels bad about your loss. The problem is that the writer
recalls the specific words involved instead of the pertinent rule, which was
not explained.
9. Be Sensitive to Changes in the Language

   Even if you know all the rules of grammar, you’re covered only for today,
not tomorrow. The rules change. Grammar is a living thing; it grows to meet
new needs.
   An obvious example of this is something called the degenderization of
language. The feminist movement has successfully lifted our consciousness
about the fact that English pronouns of unspecified gender are always male, a
fact that contributes to the idea that males are the regular folk and females are
something else. It is good grammar but poor feminism to write, “A doctor
should always clean his stethoscope before checking someone’s heart.”
   Several solutions to the problem have been suggested. Among them are
he/she, his/her, and s/he. None has really caught on. What is catching on,
however, is “A doctor should always clean their stethoscope,” an error in
number that is perpetrated by people who would rather offend grammarians
than feminists. It’s good feminism but bad grammar, and I don’t like it. In
fact, to be perfectly honest about it, I hate it. But I’m starting to get used to it,
and it seems to be earning its way into the language. If it proves to be made of
hearty stuff, I will welcome it.
   The point is that it’s bad grammar today, but it might be good grammar ten
years from now. Today’s rules have no better shot at immortality than thee
and thou had.



10. Prefer Good Writing to Good Grammar

  Keep in mind that good grammar, even perfect grammar, does not
guarantee good writing any more than a good referee guarantees a good
basketball game.
  “It is my objective to utilize my management expertise more fully, than has
heretofore been the case” is acceptable grammar but poor writing because it is
poor communication. The sentence should read, “I’m looking for a better
job.” On the other hand, “I ain’t got no money” is terrible grammar but could
be good writing in some context by communicating exactly what the writer
wants to communicate.
  There are many writing situations in which inferior grammar makes for
superior writing. You could use poor grammar to reveal the character of a
narrator, as Mac Hyman did in No Time for Sergeants.

   The thing was, we had gone fishing that day and Pa had wore himself out
   with it the way he usually did when he went fishing. I mean he went at it
   pretty hard and called the fish all sorts of names—he lost one pretty nice
   one and hopped up in the boat and banged the pole down in the water
   which was about enough to scare a big-sized alligator away, much less a
   fish, and he spent most of the afternoon after that cussing and ranting at
   everything that happened.

   You could use poor grammar in an essay or an opinion piece to establish a
certain tone: “Marvin Hagler and Ray Leonard go at each other tonight in the
Centrum, and it ain’t gonna be pretty.”
   You can also use faulty grammar in a story or novel to characterize people,
places, and events, or to establish a casual, conversational tone. In this
example, poor grammar does both jobs: “Moose asked every guy in the bar if
they had seen Helen. Nobody knew nothing. Moose looked like he was going
to tear the place apart.” There are three grammatical mistakes in those three
sentences, but they are all intentional and they are all doing some work.
   Whenever you knowingly use poor grammar, you should ask yourself two
questions. The first: Is my meaning clear? If the answer is no, rewrite. The
second question: What am I getting in return for the poor grammar? If you
can’t answer that, don’t use poor grammar.
   So strive most of all for good writing, but make proper grammar your rule
and improper grammar your exception. Don’t give easy access to every
bizarre construction or chunk of senseless jargon that comes whistling down
the pike. Never violate a rule of grammar unless you have a good reason, one
that improves the writing.
   But never choose good grammar over good writing. There is nothing
virtuous about good grammar that does not work. Your goal is good writing.
Good grammar is only one of the tools you use to achieve it.
                              9
   SIX WAYS TO AVOID PUNCTUATION
               ERRORS


1. Use Orthodox Punctuation
2. Know When to Use a Comma
3. Know When to Use a Semicolon
4. Know When to Use a Colon
5. Use Exclamation Points Only When Exclaiming and
Question Marks Only When Asking Questions
6. Know How to Use Quotation Marks
1. Use Orthodox Punctuation


   Writing is not a visual art, so don’t use punctuation as decoration. Be
creative in your writing, not in your punctuation.
   After writing an exclamation, use only one exclamation point. No! is every
bit as effective as No!!!
   Avoid using unnecessary quotation marks. Some writers insist on placing
quotation marks around slang words: My “old man” is going to give me some
“big bucks.” If you wish to use slang or idioms, do so, but do so without
quotation marks.
   Avoid using unnecessary dashes and ellipses. Some writers use dashes (—)
and ellipses (. . .) to cover faulty sentence constructions and vague thoughts.
Don’t.
   In the following e-mail, a writer uses dashes and ellipses the way drunks
use whiskey.

   Hey Robert,
   Well . . . How are you? I’m okay—I guess . . . My mother came to visit
   last week—you can imagine how much fun that was . . . All she did the
   whole time she was here was criticize my clothes, my weight . . .
   everything. Anyhow, you get the picture . . . God!!! So—not much new
   to report.
                                                                Love,
                                                                Betsy




2. Know When to Use a Comma

  Commas are used to add clarity to a sentence. Consider the sentence below:

   She was frightened when he kissed her and fainted.
Without a comma, we don’t know who fainted. Perhaps she fainted when he
kissed her. On the other hand, perhaps she became frightened because he
fainted during the kiss. Only a comma will give this sentence meaning for us:

   She was frightened when he kissed her, and fainted.

Ah, she fainted.
   When deciding whether a sentence you have written needs a comma, read
the sentence out loud. Is a pause needed for clarity? Read the sentence
without the pause—quickly, if you’re still not certain. If the sentence makes
perfect sense to you when read at breakneck speed, banish that comma. In
addition to being wrong, overpunctuation is deadly dull. A good piece of
advice: When your ear fails you and you can’t decide whether to add that
comma, DON’T.
   Many otherwise good writers use too many commas. I think one of the
reasons is because we were half-asleep in grammar classes as children and
never bothered to learn the difference between restrictive and nonrestrictive
clauses. Unfortunately, while we must have been sleeping when the terms
were explained, we learned just enough to get ourselves in trouble.
   Read the sentences below and see which ones require commas:

  1. My friend Pat goes to law school.
  2. A dance like the limbo requires a broomstick or pole.
  3. Animals that have fur are fun to pet.
  4. Do not use a comma unless a pause is needed for clarity.

The answer? None of the sentences needs a comma. If you read the sentences
out loud, your ears should have told you that pauses were not needed. But if
you were once one of those children who slept half the time during grammar
classes, you might have decided to add commas because the sentences looked
a lot like sentences that need commas.
   Restrictive clauses and words do not require commas. Nonrestrictive words
and clauses do. Restrictive elements define and limit a sentence. They must
be present for a sentence to retain its intended meaning. Nonrestrictive
elements, which are parenthetical, do not.
   Look at the following sentences. Notice that in each of the sentences with
nonrestrictive elements, the material contained in commas could be removed
without changing the sentence’s meaning.
             Nonrestrictive                               Restrictive

Some dances, like the limbo, require       A dance like the limbo requires a
broomsticks or poles.                      broomstick or pole.
One of my friends, Pat, goes to law        My friend Pat goes to law school.
school.
Snakes, which don’t have fur, aren’t much Animals that have fur are fun to pet.
fun to pet.

  Here are some other rules to help you with commas:

   1. Use a comma following introductory words like Yes, No, and But.
Realize, though, that there are times when such words are not being used as
introductions to a sentence.


                 Wrong                                         Right

Yes I did take the money.                  Yes, I did take the money.
My answer is, yes.                         My answer is yes.
Now, is the time for all good men to come Now is the time for all good men to come
to the aid of their country.              to the aid of their country.
Now if you take the bus, you’ll save       Now, if you take the bus, you’ll save
money.                                     money.

  2. Clauses joined by but often require a comma: He wanted to eat out, but
he didn’t have any money.
  3. Use commas between members of a series.


                 Wrong                                         Right

Jim, Jane, and Sue, went to the store.     Jim, Jane, and Sue went to the store.

  4. Use a comma before a direct quotation. (If the direct quotation is long,
use a colon rather than a comma.)

                 Wrong                                         Right

She said “I am a nun and so I can’t go     She said, “I am a nun and so I can’t go
out on a date with you.”                   out on a date with you.”
She said that, “She was a nun and so she She said that she was a nun and so she
couldn’t go out with me.”                couldn’t go out with me.

   5. Following a person’s name, set off by commas information indicating
residence, position, or title.

                Wrong                                      Right

Mr. and Ms. Smith-Johnson of Portland,   Mr. and Ms. Smith-Johnson, of Portland,
Oregon were at the ball.                 Oregon, were at the ball.

  6. Use a comma to separate elements of a sentence that might be misread.

     When happy, men and women tend to smile.
     If I make a will, will I ever be able to change it?

   In addition to the rules above, there are many others. I’ve tried to review
the ones that give writers the most trouble. If you have other questions about
commas, I suggest reading Words into Type.



3. Know When to Use a Semicolon

  The semicolon signals a distinct pause in a sentence. Use it when a comma
would not give your sentence sufficient pause.

  1. Use a semicolon to separate closely related independent clauses that are
not joined by a conjunction.

   Nushka looked at the clock; Nanette looked at the floor.

   Not all sailors love the sea; not all garbagemen love garbage.

  2. Use a semicolon to separate word series that contain commas.

   They bought soda, potato chips, ice cream, and candy; several games and
   toys; and three books.
4. Know When to Use a Colon

  Colons are used to introduce lists, formal quotations, and examples:

  Please bring the following items: cups, sugar packets, spoons, nondairy
  creamers, napkins, coffee, and coffeepots. We will bring everything else
  required to make the coffee.

  In Act I of Falling Bodies, Bernice speaks of a white cross: “We used to lie
  in our beds at night and watch this sign on top of the life insurance
  building. . . .”

  JoDean wants to become a nun for the wrong reasons. For example: She
  speaks endlessly about how upset her ex-boyfriend will be when she enters
  the convent; she speaks endlessly about how she will get to wear a habit;
  and she speaks endlessly about how nice it will be to have her own
  bedroom.



5. Use Exclamation Points Only When Exclaiming and
Question Marks Only When Asking Questions

   Most of us presume we know when to use question marks and exclamation
points. But both punctuation marks have given many good writers trouble.
   Exclamation points should be used only after commands or statements of
strong feeling. Only teenagers are justified in believing that each and every
statement one utters is an exclamation. The rest of us should know better.
Trust your sentences to reveal emotions. Don’t rely on punctuation to show
how much feeling you bring to your writing.


                   Bad                                        Better

It’s easy to cut men’s hair! Just get       It’s easy to cut men’s hair. Just get
yourself a man, a pair of scissors, and a   yourself a man, a pair of scissors, and a
bowl!                                       bowl.
Gertrude said, “Honestly! I’m not a         Gertrude said, “Honestly! I’m not a
moron!”                                     moron.”
  There are two instances when writers misuse questions marks. First, a
question mark should be used only to ask a direct question, not to express
wonderment. Second, a question mark is not used to ask an indirect question.


                 Wrong                                       Right

I wonder why she isn’t here?               I wonder why she isn’t here.
He asked how old Judy was?                 He asked how old Judy was.




6. Know How to Use Quotation Marks

  All words taken directly from another’s speech or writing must be set off in
quotation marks.


                 Wrong                                       Right

He said, Sometime I will, and then he      He said, “Sometime I will,” and then he
walked away.                               walked away.
It was Shakespeare who wrote, To be or     It was Shakespeare who wrote, “To be or
not to be.                                 not to be.”

  Do not use quotation marks around words that are not directly taken from
speech or writing.


                 Wrong                                       Right
He said that “Sometime he would,” and      He said that sometime he would, and then
then he walked away.                       he walked away.
Hamlet wanted both “to be and not to       Hamlet wanted both to be and not to be,
be,” and so he couldn’t bring himself to   and so he couldn’t bring himself to
commit suicide.                            commit suicide.
She told them to “Get up in the morning.” She told them to get up in the morning.
                                           Or:
                                           She told them, “Get up in the morning.”
  If a quote is contained within another quote, use single quotation marks
around the inner quote.


                 Wrong                                      Right

“Do you know what Bernice said?”          “Do you know what Bernice said?”
JoDean asked. “She said, “I’ll be dead in JoDean asked. “She said, ‘I’ll be dead in
the morning.””                            the morning.’”

  Use quotation marks around a word or phrase you intend to explain or
define.


                 Wrong                                      Right

Nervous breakdown refers to a complete    “Nervous breakdown” refers to a
collapse and not to a slight feeling of   complete collapse and not to a slight
depression.                               feeling of depression.
What is meant by nuclear meltdown?        What is meant by “nuclear meltdown”?
I use the word hopeful only when I mean   I use the word “hopeful” only when I
full of hope.                             mean “full of hope.”
                                          Or:
                                          I use the word hopeful only when I mean
                                          “full of hope.”

  Titles of articles in magazines, poems, songs, and sermons are set off in
quotation marks:


                 Wrong                                      Right

My favorite Beatles song is ELEANOR       My favorite Beatles song is “Eleanor
RIGBY.                                    Rigby.”
Did you read One Million Ways to Lose     Did you read “One Million Ways to Lose
Weight in “Glamour” or in some other      Weight” in Glamour or in some other
magazine?                                 magazine?

   The words yes and no are put in quotation marks only when they are
directly quoted:


                 Wrong                                      Right
She could not say “no” to her mother.    She could not say no to her mother.
Tell her “No.”                           Tell her no.
She looked me in the eye and whispered   She looked me in the eye and whispered,
no.                                      “No.”
                            10
TWELVE WAYS TO AVOID MAKING YOUR
        READER HATE YOU


1. Avoid Jargon
2. Avoid Clichés
3. Avoid Parentheses
4. Avoid Footnotes
5. Don’t Use Transitions to Conceal Information
6. Don’t Acknowledge When You Should Explain
7. Don’t Hide Behind Your Words
8. Don’t Intrude
9. Don’t Play Word Games
10. Don’t Play the Tom Wolfe Game
11. Don’t Play the Mystery Game
12. Don’t Cheat
1. Avoid Jargon


   Jargon refers to language used by a specific profession or group as a kind
of shorthand or code. Police officers, venture capitalists, sailors, surgeons,
surfers, and the military all have their own jargon, which might be slang
(hang ten), acronyms (APB), or simply words they use differently than
outsiders do (grunt).
   Jargon can also be defined as meaningless language—empty phrases such
as “in point of fact”—or language that is pretentious or verbose.
   We’re all guilty. I use jargon. You use jargon. From time to time every
person utters something that is without meaning or doesn’t mean what he or
she wants it to mean. In spoken language this is forgivable; after all, when we
speak, we’re all working in the first draft. But writers should certainly be able
to keep jargon under control. If it is necessary to use technical jargon, try to
use it in a way that makes your meaning clear in context, or include a brief
explanation.
   Because I can’t possibly cover thoroughly the subject of jargon here, I
recommend three books: Jargon: Its Uses and Abuses by Walter Nash, On
Language by Noam Chomsky, and The Language Instinct: How the Mind
Creates Language by Steven Pinker.
   Here’s a tip: If you can make a man sound like an idiot simply by quoting
him, he’s probably using pretentious jargon.


                  Bad                                       Better
I advise you to remain un-ambulatory for Don’t walk for six weeks.
the next six weeks.
We believe these improvements will lead    We believe these improvements will lead
to enhanced learning environments.         to better classrooms.
The forthcoming regulations have been      There’s been a lot of vandalism after
instituted due to the increasing incidence school, so I’ve made some new rules.
of postschool vandalism.
2. Avoid Clichés

  Clichés are a dime a dozen. If you’ve seen one, you’ve seen them all.
They’ve been used once too often. They’ve outlived their usefulness. Their
familiarity breeds contempt. They make the writer look as dumb as a
doornail, and they cause the reader to sleep like a log. So be sly as a fox.
Avoid clichés like the plague. If you start to use one, drop it like a hot potato.
Instead, be smart as a whip. Write something that is fresh as a daisy, cute as a
button, and sharp as a tack. Better safe than sorry.




3. Avoid Parentheses

    Parentheses are used to enclose material that is not strictly necessary but
rather serves as a comment on or a supplement to the main text. If you are
using parentheses more than three times in a ten-page story, you are either
interrupting the reader too much or you are using parentheses unnecessarily.
The writer usually turns to parentheses out of laziness, not out of need, and
there is usually an unobtrusive way to include the information without
parentheses.
    Mark Twain wrote, “A parenthesis is evidence that the man who uses it
does not know how to write English or is too indolent to take the trouble to do
it; . . . a man who will wantonly use a parenthesis will steal. For these reasons
I am unfriendly to the parenthesis. When a man puts one into my mouth, his
life is no longer safe.”
    Twain, as you can see, didn’t much care for the parenthesis.
    I wouldn’t say you should never use parentheses, but I think you should use
them rarely.


                  Bad                                       Better

Parentheses are used to enclose material   Parentheses are used to enclose material
that would otherwise be an annoying        that would otherwise be an annoying
interruption. (A humorous observation,     interruption, such as a humorous
for example.)                              observation.
4. Avoid Footnotes

   Footnotes are a requirement for research papers and are sometimes
necessary for other kinds of writing. They are used to acknowledge sources,
and sometimes they provide the reader with valuable supplementary material
that just isn’t compatible with the overall tone of the story.
   Use them if you must for those purposes. But please don’t use footnotes as
a junkyard for all the words you cut from the text but couldn’t bear to part
with. Footnotes are distracting, they are ugly, and they frequently work
against you because the reader can’t remember what he or she knows from the
text or from the footnotes.
   The last word on this matter belongs to John Barrymore. He said, “A
footnote in a book is like a knock on the door downstairs while you are on
your honeymoon.”



5. Don’t Use Transitions to Conceal Information

  As a writer, you have entered a covenant with the reader. The whole
writing/reading process depends on the writer and reader having faith that the
other will not violate the terms of the covenant. If the covenant were written
out, it would contain a clause concerning transitions that would look like this:

      Reader agrees that a transition such as “Sam drove to the church” can
   encompass all the routine acts of starting a car, taking left turns, etc.
      In turn Writer agrees not to use such transitions to deprive reader of
   information that belongs to Reader.

    In other words, you shouldn’t use the transition “Sam drove to the church”
if later in your story you are going to mention that Sam had a horrible
accident and killed a carload of lawyers while driving to the church.
    Don’t cheat readers on the grounds that you wish to surprise them later in
the story. Readers know the difference between being cheated and being
surprised.
6. Don’t Acknowledge When You Should Explain

   Many writers try to force transitions to do work that should have been done
elsewhere in the story or article.
   In the 1930’s, adventure serials with cliff-hanger endings were popular in
the London monthlies. At the end of one installment, the writer had his hero,
Ben, trapped at the bottom of a dark and slippery twenty-foot pit with no
tools, no ladder, and nobody around to hear his cries. For a month people all
over London discussed Ben’s plight. How would good old Ben get out of this
mess? Unfortunately, the writer of the serial was wondering the same thing,
and by the time his deadline arrived he had not come up with a clever
solution. So he began his episode with, “After Ben got out of the pit, he
proceeded to walk toward the city,” a transition that put his readers into a
lynching mood and did serious damage to the writer’s career.
   “After Ben got out of the pit” would be a perfectly decent transition if
climbing out of a twenty-foot pit were as routine an activity as driving to a
church. The reader will accept your acknowledgment of changes in time or
place only if those changes could have been accomplished in normal, routine
ways, or in unusual ways that you have made believable earlier in your story.
If you tell us on page 1 that Superman can fly, we will have no trouble later
on accepting the transition “On Tuesday Superman flew to Clinton,
Massachusetts.”
   When you find yourself having difficulty moving from one section of an
article to the next, the problem might be due to the fact that you are leaving
out information. Rather than trying to force an awkward transition, take
another look at what you have written and ask yourself what you need to
explain in order to move on to your next section.



7. Don’t Hide Behind Your Words

  You should be willing to put yourself into what you write. That doesn’t
mean you should write everything in the first person, or that you should
meticulously insert your feelings and observations into every memo. What it
does mean is you should not be afraid to climb onto the page when your
presence will strengthen what you have written.
   Let’s say there’s a disastrous hotel fire in Providence, Rhode Island, and
you were staying in the hotel at the time. It would be unthinkable to leave
yourself out of the story. You, after all, are an eyewitness. You felt the heat,
you saw the people leap from windows, you heard the lower floors cave in
beneath you. Your experience, your feelings at the time, can bring the reader
right into an article like nothing else:

   At noon on August 3, I was in Room 1104 of the Westcott Hotel, just five
   floors above a flame that would eventually consume the entire hotel and
   take 118 lives.

   But if you were in Amarillo, Texas, at the time of the Providence fire and
were assigned three months later to write a story about it, your experience at
the time is of no relevance to your article, and so it would be foolish to write
the following:

   At the time of the Providence hotel fire I was in Amarillo, Texas, swilling
   down piña coladas with William F. Buckley.

  If you decide it is best to put yourself into a story, do so with confidence
and enthusiasm. Don’t creep shyly in with some absurd device like “This
reporter witnessed the events,” or the pretentious “We” when you mean “I.”
  In other words, don’t be coy about involving yourself in what you write.




8. Don’t Intrude

   If you are going to put yourself into an article, memo, or story, do it early.
   It’s okay to begin your profile, “I met Jane Fonda at the Top of the Pru in
Boston. She was staring out at the Boston skyline. She was startled when I
touched her.”
   On the other hand, you are intruding if you have written forty-three
paragraphs about Jane Fonda, all without mentioning yourself, and suddenly
let drop: “She turned to me then, the weariness showing in her face, and I
thought for a moment that she would place her head on my shoulder.”
   Don’t make the reader ask the question: Where the hell did he come from?
   Here are some other types of intrusions you must avoid:
1. Typographical and spelling errors, as well as blatant grammatical errors,
will break the reader’s spell. They will remind him that he is reading.

   “Ask not what you’re county can do for you, but what you can do for
   you’re country.”

2. Obscure words, difficult words, and words that don’t come within a mile of
the meaning you are assigning to them will also break the reader’s spell.

   Van was the cotyledon of the family, and Donna, the youngest, was of
   course the coup de grâce.

3. Using the same word in unrelated ways two or three times in a short space
will also intrude on the reader’s trance.

   The night was still and quiet. From our position on the hillside we could
   see that the still was still there.



9. Don’t Play Word Games

   Puns, double entendres, rhymes, inside jokes, and various other literary
parlor tricks are amusing, and they can be good writing in a story that is
intentionally whimsical. But generally you should stay away from them in
your writing. They might make you look clever, but they will diminish the
success of the writing. The reader sees too much of form and loses track of
content. Quite often the reader will chuckle at your cleverness but will cease
to take your story seriously.
   It is often when searching for the perfect title that a writer falls prey to
word games. Don’t call an article about a coyote that has escaped from the
zoo “Don Coyote.” Please.




10. Don’t Play the Tom Wolfe Game
   If you have read any of Tom Wolfe’s early books, you know that Wolfe
employed a lot of visual GIMMICKS like ZOWeeee!!!!!, lively little passages
full of CAPITAL LETTERS, and unUSual Punk Chew A Shun. . . . !!!?
   I call that the Tom Wolfe game, and it was fine for Wolfe. It was fun. It
worked. It became part of his writing personality. It’s his.
   But ninety-nine percent of the time this sort of thing fails. It draws attention
to the gimmick and away from the content. It reminds readers that they are
reading, and it occasionally brands the writer a moron.
   Certainly the appearance of your story is not irrelevant. Clean fonts, good
margins, consistent spacing—all of these things affect the success of the story.
But writing is not primarily a visual art. It is more like music than oil
painting, and the extent to which it must depend on the shape, size, and color
of those squiggly little lines is the extent to which it is not writing, but is
something else.
   If you cannot state a good reason for doing SOMEthing LYKE
Thhhhiiiissss!!!, don’t do it.




11. Don’t Play the Mystery Game

   You are playing the mystery game when you withhold some vital piece of
information because you think the reader will hang in there until the end just
to find out what it is. More likely the reader will be distracted by the
unanswered question and will not pay close attention to what you write.
   In On Becoming a Novelist, John Gardner put it this way: “One of the most
common mistakes among young writers is the idea that a story gets its power
from withheld information—that is, from the writer setting the reader up and
then bushwhacking him. Ungenerous fiction is first and foremost fiction in
which the writer is unwilling to take the reader as an equal partner.”
   Every writing teacher has read hundreds of unpublished stories that begin
with something like “The package arrived at two a.m. Sammy opened it in a
frenzy; he stared at its contents and smiled.” The story goes on and on, and
we hear a lot about “it” or “the contents of the package.” If we stick around
long enough, we discover in the last paragraph that the package contained an
adorable beagle puppy.
   Another common version of the mystery game occurs in the first-person
story. We don’t learn until the end that the speaker is not a person at all but a
1957 nickel or an oak tree. This is silly stuff. Gardner describes it as the
writer jumping out at the last minute and yelling, “Surprise!” It’s also an
extremely efficient way to drive away readers.
   Similarly, when writing a paper for a school assignment, bring the
statement you wish to prove into the paper’s beginning, and then prove your
statement. Don’t wait until you are almost finished with your paper to
mention what it is you are writing about.




12. Don’t Cheat

  Readers expect writers to be honest. Don’t let them down. Even when
writing fictional stories, don’t mislead readers or hide facts from them.
Especially, don’t lie.
  The exception to this is the unreliable narrator, used by novelists from
Agatha Christie to Gillian Flynn to great effect. Even then, a well-written
unreliable narrator will provide clues to his or her unreliability that the reader
misses at the time and sees only in hindsight.
  Adhere to the guidelines below, and readers will reward your honesty by
believing in your words.


                  Don’t                                          Do

Don’t obscure the quotes you use. If Mr.     Do show compassion for those you quote.
Green said, “I, uh, uh, occasionally have    If Mr. Green said, “I, uh, uh, occasionally
a drink,” don’t edit the quote so that it    have a drink,” there is no reason to
reads, “I . . . drink.” The meaning of the   include Mr. Green’s stammers in your
two quotes is different.                     quote (unless you are trying to prove that
                                             Mr. Green is not an effective speaker).
                                             Your quote should read, “I occasionally
                                             have a drink.”
Don’t present another’s idea as your own. Do give credit where credit is due.
If you are writing about the water
imagery in Shakespeare’s comedies and
you read a book by Rosemary Gilvary in
which there is a list of all the water
imagery in Shakespeare’s comedies, you
must give Ms. Gilvary credit if you make
use of the list.
Don’t ignore facts. If you are writing a    Do show how the other side feels, and do
paper in which you want to prove that       present facts that the other side would use
smoking marijuana will lead to lower        to refute you. Such facts can be used to
grades in school, you should not ignore     your advantage.
facts that run contrary to your argument.
If you discover that several outstanding
scholars have smoked marijuana, you
should reveal that fact and find a way to
incorporate it into your argument,
perhaps by saying that these scholars
would have performed even better had
they not smoked marijuana.
Don’t pretend to have proved something Do consider what it is you want to prove
you haven’t proved. If you write a memo and then spend your time proving it.
in which you insist that employees must
stop taking fifteen-minute coffee breaks
because company policy forbids them, do
not conclude your memo by writing,
“Employees who take fifteen-minute
coffee breaks make more work for those of
us who limit ourselves to ten-minute
coffee breaks.” If you wanted to make
that argument, you should have written a
memo in which you proved it.
Don’t lie. Occasionally, a writer will be   Do introduce opinions as opinions, and
tempted to write something that isn’t true. not as facts.
Are all boxing fans bloodthirsty? If not,
don’t write that they are. Be careful to
point out what is your opinion as opposed
to what is a fact.
                             11
      SEVEN WAYS TO EDIT YOURSELF


1. Read Your Work Out Loud
2. Cut Unnecessary Words
3. Think About What You Have Written
4. Ask Yourself These Questions
5. Follow These Rules of Form for Titles
6. Prepare a Perfect Manuscript
7. Use Common Sense
1. Read Your Work Out Loud


   Before you turn in anything you have written—whether to a teacher or an
editor—read aloud every word.
   Often when you write and rewrite and constantly rearrange information,
your ear for the sound of the writing becomes corrupted. Reading out loud
will return to you the true sound of your story. You will hear the sour note of
the word that’s “just not right,” and the drastic changes in tone will cry out to
you for editing. You’ll notice that you are breathless at the end of one long
sentence, and you will know that you must break it up into two or three.
Listen for the music, variety, and emphasis of your sentences. You will
discover that some of them are confusing and need a word added or removed
for clarity’s sake. And you will see that a sentence like “Who knew that Lou
cued Sue, too?” might not look funny, but it sure makes a funny and
distracting noise in the reader’s head.



2. Cut Unnecessary Words

   Let’s pretend your mechanic called you up and said, “Mr. Duckworth
(assuming your name is Mr. Duckworth), your car is ready. I’ve put in a new
carburetor, an alternator, and three unnecessary parts.”
   What would you think of such a phone call?
   Hmmm. You might think it’s time to get a new mechanic.
   You don’t want unnecessary parts in your car. They do no good, and they
slow you down.
   So you certainly don’t want unnecessary words in your writing. They do no
good, and they slow you and your reader down.
   Every word you write should be doing some work in the sentence. It should
earn its keep by providing some portion of the total information you are trying
to communicate. A word is unnecessary if it’s doing no work, if it’s doing
work that doesn’t have to be done, or if it’s doing work that’s being done by
another word or phrase nearby.
   Read what you have written and cross out every word that is not
contributing information. Sometimes you will cross out two words and
replace them with one. Sometimes you will cross out ten words and replace
them with five. But most of the words you cross out will require no
replacement.


                    Bad                                          Better

The annual ball is held once a year in        The annual ball is held in Quincy.
Quincy.
It is my opinion that rock and roll will live I think rock and roll will live forever.
forever.
In the event of rain, the picnic will be held If it rains, the picnic will be held Monday.
on Monday.
I would like to say that she was wrong.       She was wrong.
Tom proceeded to thread the needle.           Tom threaded the needle.
At that point in time I was still wearing     Then, I wore hats.
hats.
The suspect was driving a 1981                The suspect was driving a blue 1981
Chevrolet, blue in color.                     Chevrolet.
It has come to my attention that        Employees are spending too much time at
employees are spending too much time at the water cooler.
the water cooler.




3. Think About What You Have Written

   It’s very easy when you are locked in the passionate embrace of the writing
muse to write something that sounds really dumb. The writer routinely
includes the banal, the inaccurate, and the just plain stupid in early drafts
simply by forgetting that what one meant to say is not always what got
written down.
   But when the passion cools a bit and the writer rereads his or her work,
curious phrases will suddenly show themselves: Did she mean to write,
“There was literally an ocean of people . . .”? Of course not. But she did. Did
he intend to write, “He could care less . . .”? No. He meant to write, “He
couldn’t care less.”
   You will make mistakes in your early drafts. That’s okay. But before you
complete a final draft, let at least a day pass and then think carefully about
what you wrote before turning to your keyboard. You may find that what you
thought was brilliant prose on Tuesday borders on the moronic by Friday. On
the other hand, you may discover that what seemed trivial when you wrote it
is, in fact, profound.




4. Ask Yourself These Questions

  Before calling a draft final, ask these questions:

  1. Is it clear from the beginning what you’re writing about?
  2. Does each paragraph advance the subject?
  3. Do the important ideas stand out clearly?
  4. Are more details, examples, or anecdotes needed?
  5. Is the information sufficiently clear?
  6. Are there sweeping statements that need to be supported?
  7. Do any technical terms need explanation?
  8. Is there needless repetition?
  9. Is the tone consistent?
 10. Are any of the sentences too involved to follow with ease?
 11. Are any of the words vague?
 12. Are there grammatical errors?
 13. Are there punctuation errors?




5. Follow These Rules of Form for Titles

  Before submitting a final manuscript, review these rules for titles:

  1. The title of a book-length manuscript should be typed on a separate
     page, together with the author’s name. Set the title at the very center of
     the page. The author’s name goes below the title.
  2. Titles of short manuscripts should be centered at the top of the first page
     of your paper or story.
  3. Capitalize titles in the following manner:
           Educated: A Memoir
           Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone
           Of Mice and Men
     Prepositions that have fewer than four letters should not be capitalized
     unless they are the first word of the title. Similarly, only capitalize
     definite and indefinite articles if they are the first word of the title.
  4. Use italics for titles of books, magazines, movies, and plays.
  5. Use quotation marks around the titles of articles, short stories, poems,
     songs, and other short pieces of writing.




6. Prepare a Perfect Manuscript

   If you are proud of the words you have written, you will want to present
them in the best possible manner.
   If you are turning in a hard copy, use 8½" x 11" white paper of good
quality.
   Use black ink only.
   Whether a hard copy or an online submission, leave wide margins—at least
an inch on all sides.
   Half-inch indent for a new paragraph.
   Double space.
   Use a 12 pt. font, clean and easy to read.
   Spell check, proofread, and make corrections. Remember, spell check will
not always catch misused words.




7. Use Common Sense

   I write often about writing, and that can be terrifying. Sometimes I feel as if
I’m standing in front of a firing squad and the captain will give the order to
shoot as soon as I have violated my own advice. Have I used too many words
to tell you not to use too many words? Is my voice too passive when I tell you
to use the active voice? Is my grammar faulty when I tell you to bone up on
your grammar?
   It is not hard to imagine a legion of mean-spirited readers out there
scanning my every word with a magnifying glass, all of them poised to leap
on the first sign of contradiction. Off to their laptops they will run, and soon
my inbox will be overflowing with e-mail, all of which begin, “Dear Mr.
Provost, On page such and such you said this, but just thirty-two pages later
you said that. Are you a moron?”
   No, I’m not. Honestly. I am—dare I say it—an artist. And that is my escape
hatch. Writing is art, not science, and when I finish a piece of writing, I do not
review every single one of my tips. I ask: Have I communicated well? Have I
pleased my readers? Have I given them something that is a joy to read? Have
I entertained them, informed them, persuaded them, and made my thoughts
clear to them? Have I given them what they wanted?
   And these are the questions you must ask about all that you write. If the
answers are yes, you have succeeded. If the answers are no, you have failed.
Writing well is what counts.
   The tips in this book encompass much of the accumulated knowledge about
what writing techniques work best, which patterns of language most
successfully reach and hold readers. But like all tips they should be
considered carefully before being acted on.
   So don’t use the active voice “because it’s the right way.” Don’t write with
strong nouns and verbs “because you’re supposed to.” And don’t maintain
consistently good grammar “because only stupid people don’t.” Tips, not
laws. Think about these tips. Apply them generally. They will guide you to
successful writing.
   And do something else. Accept the fact that there is good writing and bad
writing. There is writing that runs, and there is writing that plods. There is
writing that wakes up readers and writing that puts them to sleep. So turn to
this book from time to time. Stretch your vocabulary. Read. A lot. And, most
important, develop your ear for the sound of written language. When you
have done these, you will have the knowledge and the wisdom to apply the
best tip of all: Use your own common sense.
                  ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Gary Provost was a writing teacher and the author of more than a thousand
published articles and stories. His two dozen books include both adult and YA
fiction, and nonfiction such as The Freelance Writer's Handbook. His
methods continue to be taught at the semiannual writer's conference he
established, the Writer's Retreat Workshop (www.wakeupandwritewrw.com).
                 What’s next on
                your reading list?

                  Discover your next
                      great read!


Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this
                         author.

                     Sign up now.
